NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters, Cadastral Zone, Nnamdi
Azikiwe Express Road, Jabi, Abuja
Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island,
Lagos
E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng
URL: www.nou.edu.ng
Published by
National Open University of Nigeria
Printed by
National Open University of Nigeria
Printed
ISBN:
All Rights Reserved

                                                               1
COURSE DEVELOPER/WRITER: DR. MARTINS ISHAYA, AND GRACE DALLONGOPADOTUN.

DEPARTMENT OF JURISPRUDENCE AND INTERNATIONAL LANATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF
NIGERIA.

COURSE EDITOR: Dr. Chegwe Emeke N

HEAD OF DEPT, JURISPRUDENCE AND INTERNATIONAL LAW,
NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA.

COURSE CODE: JIL 100
COURSE TITLE: INTRODUCTION TO NIGERIA LAW

                                                                  COURSE GUIDE

NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA.

                                                               2
National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters, Cadastral Zone, Nnamdi
Azikiwe Express Road, Jabi, Abuja
Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island,
Lagos
E-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng
URL: www.nou.edu.ng

Published and Printed by
National Open University of Nigeria
ISBN: All Rights Reserved 2017.

                                                               3
CONTENT                           COURSE GUIDE

Introduction                PAGE
Justification
Course Objective            4
Working through the Course  4
Course Materials            4
Study Units                 4
References                  5
Assignment Files            6
Assessment                  7
Summary                     8
                            8
                            9

                                                                     INTRODUCTION

JIL 100, Introduction to Law, intends to acquaint the students with the tradition of
law in Nigeria, a multi cultural society and the suitability of a federal constitution
for Nigeria. It also intends to make them familiar with nature, scope, and
significance of law. In addition, it endeavors to make them aware of the
development of law and legal institutions of the country in general. With these

                                                               4
objectives, the course addresses the nature, sources and classification of law . It
focuses on the Nigerian legal system and Judicial Precedent. The course strives to
instill in students basic knowledge and understanding of criminal law, law of torts,
contract and principal and agent relationship.

2.0 Justification

Law does not operate in a vacuum. It has to reflect social values, attitudes and
behavior. Societal values and norms, directly or indirectly, influence law. Law also
endeavors to mould and control these values, attitudes and behavioral patterns
so that they flow in a proper channel. It attempts either to support the social
system or to change the prevalent social situation or relationship by its formal
processes. Law also influences other parts of the social system. Law, therefore,
can be perceived as symbolizing the public affirmation of social facts and norms
as well as means of social control and an instrument of social change.

All collective human life is directly or indirectly shaped by law. Law is, like
knowledge, an essential and all pervasive fact of the social condition. No area of
life-whether it is the family or the religious community, scientific research is the
internal network of political parties-can find a lasting social order that is not
based on law. A minimum amount of legal orientation is indispensable
everywhere. Law is not, nor can any discipline be, an insular one. Each rule
postulates a factual situation of life to which the rule is to be applied to produce a
certain outcome.

Law, in essence, is a normative and prescriptive science. It lays down norms and
standards for human behavior in a set of specified situation(s). It is a `rule of
conduct or action' prescribed or formally recognized as binding or enforced by a
`controlling authority'. It operates in a formal fashion. It enforces these prescribed
norms through state's coercive powers. However, the societal values and patterns
are dynamic and complex. These changing societal values and ethos obviously
make the discipline of law dynamic and complex. Law, therefore, has to be
dynamic. Law has acquired a paramount significance in a modern welfare state as
an effective instrumentality of socio-economic transformation. It indeed operates
as a catalyst for such a transformation. Such a complex nature of law and its

                                                               5
operation require systematic approach to the `understanding' of `law' and its
`operational facets'. A systematic investigation into these aspects of law helps in
knowing the existing and emerging legislative policies, laws, and their social
relevance. It also enables to assess efficacy of law as an instrument of socio-
economic changes and to identify bottlenecks, if any.

3.0 COURSE OBJECTIVES
The aim and objective of this course is to give NOUN students a theoretical basis
for the understanding of Law as members of society and Nigeria Citizens, thereby
preparing them for a larger society. NOUN Students should be able to have a basic
understanding of the relation of law to society, both in terms of its nature,
dynamics and purpose: have a theorisation of law and social change, with specific
reference to Nigeria, be able to decipher the elements that make law more
efficient and understand its attributes as a social control .
4.0 WORKING THROUGH THE COURSE
To complete this course you are required to read the study units, recommended
text books and other materials. Each unit contains self ­assessment exercises and
at a tutor decided time in the course, you are required to submit assignment for
assessment purposes. At the end of the course is a final extermination. The
course should take you 14 weeks (Revision and examination inclusive) in total to
complete. Bellow you will find list of all the components of the course, what you
have to do and how you should allocate you time to each unit in order to
complete the course successfully.

                                                               6
5.0 COURSE MATERIAL
The major materials to be used for the course are:

    This Course Guide;
    Study Units;
    Text Books;
    Assignment Files; and
    Presentation Schedule

In addition, you must obtain the textbooks as they are not provided by NOUN.
You are required to obtain them in your own responsibility. You may purchase
your own copies.

6.0 STUDY UNITS
There will be 4 Modules in this Course which are sub-divided into 18 units, and
they will be distributed as follows;

MODULE ONE: DEFINITION SOURCES AND NATURE OF LAW
Unit 1: Definition of Law
Unit 2: The Nature of Law
Unit 3: Sources of Law
Unit 4: Historical Development of Nigerian Law
Unit 5: The Impact of Law in the Society

                                                               7
Unit 6: The Judicial process in Nigeria
MODULE TWO: THE PURPOSE, FUNTIONS AND CLASSIFICATION OF LAW
Unit 1: The Functions of Law in Society
Unit 2: Classification of Law
Unit 3: The Nigeria Legal System
Unit 4: The Doctrine of Separation of Power
Unit 5: The Rule of Law
MODULE THREE: MULTIPLE LEGAL SYSTEM
Unit 1: Customary Law
Unit 2: Criminal Law and civil procedure
Unit 3: Law of contract and commercial Law
Unit 4: family law
MODULE FOUR: THE ADMINISTRATION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE IN NIGERIA
Unit 1: The Nigerian Police
Unit 2: The Federal/ State Ministry of Justice
Unit 3: The Nigerian Judiciary
Unit 4: The Nigerian Prisons

Note; Most units contains a number of self test questions. These questions
generally test your understanding of the topics you have just covered by requiring
you to apply what you have read in some practical ways. This will definitely help
you to gauge you progress and to reinforce your understanding of the materials.
Together with the TMAs, these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated
leaning objectives of the individual units and of the course in general.

                                                               8
COURSE MARKING SCHEME

The following table shows how the examination will be graded for the guidance of
the student.

Continuous Assessment - 30%

Final Examination -  70%

Total -              100%

7.0 REFERENCES

Some of the important materials that will be used throughout the course are
listed below:

Ahmad, Ahmad Atif. "Lawyers: Islamic Law" (PDF). Oxford Encyclopedia of
Legal History. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26
March 2009.

Akhlaghi, Behrooz (2005). "Iranian Commercial Law and the New Investment
Law FIPPA". In Yassari, Nadjma. The Shara in the Constitutions of Afghanistan,
Iran, and Egypt. Mohr Siebeck. ISBN 3-16-148787-7.

Albrow, Martin (1970). Bureaucracy (Key Concepts in Political Science). London:
Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-11262-8.

Anderson, J.N.D. (January 1956). "Law Reform in the Middle East". International
Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944--). 32 (1): 43­51.
JSTOR 2607811. doi:10.2307/2607811.

Aristotle. Athenian Constitution. Trans. Frederic George Kenyon. Wikisource. See
original text in Perseus program.

Barzilai, Gad (2003), Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal
Identities. The University of Michigan Press, 2003. Second print 2005 ISBN 0-
472-11315-1

                             9
Auby, Jean-Bernard (2002). "Administrative Law in France". In Stroink, F.A.M.;
Seerden, René. Administrative Law of the European Union, its Member States and
the United States. Intersentia. ISBN 90-5095-251-8.

8.0 ASSIGNMENT FILE

In this file you will find the details of the work you submit to your tutor for
marking. The mark you obtain for these assignments will count towards the final
mark you obtain for this course. Further, information on the assignments will be
found in the assignment file itself.

9.0 Assessment

There are two aspects of the assessment of this course; the Tutor-Marked
Assignments and a written examination. In doing these assignments, you are
expected to apply knowledge must have acquired from the Course. The
assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the
assignment file. The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for
30% of your total score.

Tutor-Marked Assignment

There is a Tutor-Marked Assignment at the end of every unit. You are required to
attempt all the assignments. You will be assessed on all of them but the best 3
performances will be used for assessment. The assignments carry 10% each.
When you have completed each assignment, send it together with a (Tutor
Marked Assignment) form, to your tutor. Make sure that each assignment reaches
your tutor on or before the deadline. If for any reason you cannot complete your
work on time, contact your tutor. Before the assignment is due to discuss the
possibility of an extension. Extensions will not be granted after the due date
unless under exceptional circumstances.

                                                              10
Final Examination and Grading
The duration of the final examination for JIL 100 is three hours and will carry 70%
of the total course grade. The examination will consist of questions, which reflect
the kinds of Self Assessment Exercises and the Tutor- Marked Assignment you
have previously encountered. All aspects of the course will be assessed. You
should use the time between completing the last unit, and taking the examination
to revise the entire course. You may find it useful to review your Self Assessment
Exercises and Tutor-Marked Assignments before the examination.

Course Marking Scheme
The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.

Assessment Marks
Assignments 1-4 (the best three of all the assignments submitted)
Four assignments, marked out of 10% Totaling 30%
Final examination 70% of overall course score
Total 100% of course score.
10.0 SUMMARY
By trying out all of the above, we are quite confident that you will not only have a
sound understanding of Introduction to Nigerian Law, you will also be able to pass
your exams with ease.
We wish you success with the course and hope that you will find it both
interesting and useful.

                                                              11
                                                                             MAIN COURSE

COURSE CONTENT
MODULE ONE: DEFINITION SOURCES AND NATURE OF LAW
Unit 1: Definition of Law
Unit 2: The Nature of Law
Unit 3: Sources of Law
Unit 4: Historical Development of Nigerian Law
Unit 5: The Impact of Law in the Society
Unit 6: The Judicial process in Nigeria
MODULE TWO: THE PURPOSE, FUNTIONS AND CLASSIFICATION OF LAW
Unit 1: The Functions of Law in Society
Unit 2: Classification of Law
Unit 3: The Nigeria Legal System
Unit 4: The Doctrine of Separation of Power
Unit 5: The Rule of Law
MODULE THREE: MULTIPLE LEGAL SYSTEM
Unit 1: Customary Law
Unit 2: Criminal Law and civil procedure
Unit 3: Law of contract and commercial Law
Unit 4: family law
MODULE FOUR: THE ADMINISTRATION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE IN NIGERIA

                                                              12
Unit 1: The Nigerian Police

Unit 2: The Federal/ State Ministry of Justice

Unit 3: The Nigerian Judiciary

Unit 4: The Nigerian Prisons

An overview of the course

This course gives you a glimpse into six different areas of Nigerian law: Law of
Tort, law of Contract, Property law, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law, family law,
cooperative and Civil Procedure. You will gain insight into the complexities and
dilemmas that arise from the application of law in different settings, and what is
distinctive about Nigerian Law.

The introduction to Law course from National Open University of Nigeria is the
foundation and good programme for any student considering future studies or a
career in Law. The course is one semester course. During the semester students
would have interactive lectures and discussion with a lecturer who is an expert in
this field of study. Students on the course will be introduced to a variety of
different fields within the discipline. A group discussion will enable participants to
develop key skills for success in this highly competitive area, and students will
also be given an early insight into life as a Law student at university. The overall
aim of this new programme is to provide students with an initial advantage as they
start their journey towards becoming a lawyer or in other discipline that requires
basic knowledge of law.

The focus of this course for novis and old students is on assessing and evaluating
the role of law in society, interlinking core theoretical values and case-studies with
the philosophical and ethical principles that underlie the way the law operates in
modern society.

Students will be introduced to multiple legal disciplines including jurisprudence,
constitutional law, criminal law, tort law and other areas besides. They will also
explore the skills and tasks most required of multiple legal professions, in order to
assess whether they themselves would be suited to such a career in the future. The
course promotes an interactive and engaging approach, using classroom debates,
group tasks, and role-play exercises to engage students all aspects of the legal

                                                              13
landscape and their impact on society. Students also have the chance to observe a
real criminal trial at Oxford Magistrate`s Court, as well as participate in a mock
classroom-based trial of their own.

The Introduction to Law course will cover a wide range of theory and concepts,
including:

    The interrelation of a society`s values and the laws which it supports,
       including social, Political, economic, and environmental factors;

    The core principles to the formation of laws, legislature and legal systems;
    The application and interpretation of law in the courtroom;
    The application of morality and philosophy to criminal law;
    The progression of international law and its scope in the modern world;
    The importance of contracts, contract and tort law to the daily interactions of

       citizens in a society and the world of commerce;
    The role of the law in the family unit, including issues such as divorce,

       custody rights, and medical treatment;
    The rise of the Internet and the evolution of its use and regulation.

MODULE ONE: DEFINITION, SOURCES AND NATURE OF LAW

UNIT 1.DEFINITION OF LAW

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The law affects every aspect of our lives; it governs our conduct from the cradle to
the grave and its influence even extends from before our birth to after our death.
We live in a society which has developed a complex body of rules to control the
activities of its members. There are laws which govern working conditions by
laying down minimum standards of health and safety, laws which regulate leisure
pursuits,e.g. by banning alcohol on coaches and trains travelling to football
matches, and laws which control personal relationships e.g. by prohibiting
marriage between close relatives. Law regulating the conduct of human activities
generally whether on land, sea and air.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

    At the end this module you should able to understand the following:
    the meaning of law and nature of law;

                                                              14
    The ways in which the law may be classified, including the differences
       between public and private law, civil and criminal law and common law
       and equity;

    The development of English law including the emergence of the common
       law and equity;

    The basic principles of legal liability, such as the distinction between civil
       and criminal liability.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

The Concept of Law is the most famous work of the legal philosopher H. L. A.
Hart. It was first published in 1961 and develops Hart's theory of legal positivism
the view that laws are rules made by human beings and that there is no inherent or
necessary connection between law and morality within the framework of analytic
philosophy. In this work, Hart sets out to write an essay of descriptive sociology
and analytical jurisprudence. The Concept of Law provides an explanation to a
number of traditional jurisprudential questions such as what is law? must laws be
rules? and what is the relation between law and morality?. Hart answers these by
placing law into a social context while at the same time leaving the capability for
rigorous analysis of legal terms, which in effect awakened English jurisprudence
from its comfortable slumbers. As a result Hart's book has remained one of the
most influential text of analytical legal philosophy as well as the most successful
work of analytical jurisprudence ever to appear in the common law world.
There is no universal definition of what is law. Different authors have provided
different definition of law.

So, what is law and how is it different from other kinds of rules? The law is a set of
rules, enforceable by the courts, which regulate the government of the state and
govern the relationship between the state and its citizens and between one citizen
and another. As individuals will encounter many rules. The rules of a particular
sport, such as the off-side rule in football, or the rules of a club, are designed to
bring order to a particular activity. Other kinds of rule may really be social
conventions, such as not speaking ill of the dead. In this case, the rule is merely a
reflection of what a community regards to be appropriate behaviour. In neither

                                                              15
situation would we expect the rule to have the force of law and to be enforced by
the court,

Numerous definitions of law have been put forward over the centuries. The Third
New International Dictionary from Merriam-Webster defines law as a binding
custom or practice of a community; a rule or mode of conduct or action that is
prescribed or formally recognized as binding by a supreme controlling authority or
is made obligatory by a sanctions an edict, decree, rescript, order, ordinance,
statute, resolution, rule, judicial decision, or usage made, recognized, or enforced
by the controlling authority.

Austin's Command theory

The starting point for the discussion is Hart's dissatisfaction with John Austin's
command theory: a jurisprudential concept that holds that law is command backed
by threat and is meant to be ubiquitous in its application. Hart likens Austin's
theory to the role of a gunman in a bank and tries to establish the differences
between the gunman's orders and those made by law. For instance, the gunman
forces us to obey but we may not feel inclined to obey him. Presumably, obedience
to the law comes with a different feeling. Hart identifies three such important
differences: content, origin, and range. In terms of content, not all laws are
imperative or coercive. Some are facilitative, allowing us to create contracts and
other legal relations.

Austin believed that every legal system had to have a sovereign who creates the
law origin while remaining unaffected by it range, such as the bank scene's
gunman, who is the only source of commands and who is not subject to other's
commands. Hart argues that this is an inaccurate description of law, noting that
laws may have several sources and legislators are very often subject to the laws
they create.

Glanville Williams said that the meaning of the word law depends on the context
in which that word is used. He said that, for example, early customary law and
municipal law were contexts where the word law had two different and
irreconcilable meanings. Thurman Arnold said that it is obvious that it is
impossible to define the word law and that it is also equally obvious that the
struggle to define that word should not ever be abandoned. It is possible to take the
view that

                                                              16
Laws, rules and social habits

Hart draws a distinction between a social habit which people follow habitually but
where breaking the habit does not bring about opprobrium, going to the cinema on
Thursday for example and a social rule where breaking the rule is seen as wrong
neglecting to take off one's hat upon entering a church, for example. We feel in
some sense bound by social rules and laws frequently appear to be types of social
rule.

There are two perspectives to this: the external aspect, which is the independently
observable fact that people do tend to obey the rule with regularity, and the internal
aspect which is the feeling by an individual of being in some sense obligated to
follow the rule, otherwise known as the critical reflective attitude. It is from this
internal sense that the law acquires its normative quality. The obedience by the
populace of a rule is called efficacy. No law can be said to be efficacious unless
followed by the majority of the populace. Though an average citizen in a modern
state with a developed legal system may feel the internal aspect and be compelled
to follow the laws, it is more important for the officials of the society/peoples to
have the internal aspect since it is up to them to follow the constitutional
provisions which, if they wish, could ignore without accountability. Yet, the
officials must use the internal aspect and accept the standards as guiding their
behaviour in addition to also guiding the behaviour of other officials.

But laws are more than rules of conduct. Laws can be divided up into two sorts:
primary rules rules of conduct and secondary rules, rules addressed to officials and
which set out to affect the operation of primary rules. Secondary rules deal with
three problems: first the problem of uncertainty about what the law is the
secondary rule for this dilemma is called the rule of recognition and states the
criteria of validity of a law, secondly, the problem of rigidity of rules which
requires rules of change allowing laws to be varied, and thirdly, the problem of
how to resolve legal disputes from which rules of adjudication arise. A legal
system is the union of primary and secondary rules.

Lastly, Hart lets us know that laws are much broader in scope than coercive orders,
contrary to the command theory of Austin. Frequently laws are enabling and so
allow citizens to carry out authoritative acts such as the making of wills or
contracts which have legal effect.

What is the Relationship between law and morality?

                                                              17
Law is a system of rules that are created and enforced through social or
governmental institutions to regulate behaviour. Law as a system helps regulate
and ensure that a community show respect, and equality amongst themselves.
State-enforced laws can be made by a collective legislature or by a single
legislator, resulting in statutes, by the executive through decrees and regulations, or
established by judges through precedent, normally in common law jurisdictions.
Morality derived from the Latin word moralis which means, manner, character,
proper behavior is the differentiation of intentions, decisions and actions between
those that are distinguished as proper and those that are improper. Morality can be
a body of standards or principles derived from a code of conduct from a particular
philosophy, religion or culture, or it can derive from a standard that a person
believes should be universal. Morality may also be specifically synonymous with
goodness or rightness.

Moral philosophy includes moral ontology, or the origin of morals, as well as
moral epistemology, or knowledge of morals. Different systems of expressing
morality have been proposed, including deontological ethical systems which
adhere to a set of established rules, and normative ethical systems which consider
the merits of actions themselves. An example of normative ethical philosophy is
the Golden Rule, which states that: One should treat others as one would like
others to treat oneself. Immorality is the active opposition to morality i.e.
opposition to that which is good or right, while amorality is variously defined as an
unawareness of, indifference toward, or disbelief in any set of moral standards or
principles.

Morality consists in what is naturally the right thing to do, whereas law is the civil
codification of public conceptions of morality. People make laws according to their
beliefs of good and evil, right and wrong. Laws either have the goal of promoting
good behavior or punishing undesirable behavior. Thus, morality informs the law.

Nevertheless, law and morality are not identical. Many philosophers and scholars
of ethics posit that morality is objective. Moral standards do not change. Law, on
the other hand, is changeable according to the desires of lawmakers. The laws of a
state do not necessarily conform to the moral law. Throughout history, for
example, there have been laws sanctioning practices like slavery, spousal abuse
and murder. The important role of public morality in preserving lawfulness among
citizens. Enforcement of the law depends upon the threat of physical force. People
obey the law out of fear of being deprived of their life or property. However,
people who only obey out of fear of punishment look for ways to break the law
without being caught. The best way to achieve obedience to the law is for people to

                                                              18
internalize the moral principles that underlie the law. When people do so, they
obey the law even when no one is watching.

The relationship between law and morality has become increasingly relevant as
social liberals advance issues like homosexual marriage and abortion rights. Since
at least Roe v. Wade, social liberalism has also revealed a division within the
Republican Party. The relationship has provoked heated discussion here at
RedState. The most recent being a discussion over homosexual marriage about a
month ago Gay Marriage: Left vs. Right. After some reflection, I would like to
take the opportunity to enlarge on some of the points raised in that discussion.

Some points of distinction are as follows:

(a) Laws regulate external human conduct whereas morality mainly regulates
internal conduct.

S(b) Laws are universal; morality is variable.

(c) Laws are definite and precise while morality is variable.

(d) Laws are upheld by the coercive power of the state; morality simply enjoys the
support of public opinion or individual conscience.

(e) Laws are studied under Jurisprudence but morality is studied under Ethics.

4.0 SUMMARY

Ever since the revival of the scientific study of jurisprudence the connection of law
and morality has much discussed, but the question is not yet, and perhaps never
will be settled. Every variety of opinion has been entertained, from the extreme
doctrine held by Austin that for the purpose of the jurist, law is absolutely
independent of morality, almost to the opposite positions, held by every Oriental
cadi, that morality and law are one. The question is an important one, and upon the
answer which is given to it depends upon the answer which is consequences.

The popular conception of the connection between law and morality is that in some
way the law exists to promote morality, to preserve those conditions which make
the moral life possible, and than to enable men to lead sober and industrious lives.
The average man regards law as justice systematized, and justice itself as a
somewhat chaotic mass of moral principles. On this view, the positive law is

                                                              19
conceived of as a code of rules, corresponding to the code of moral laws, deriving
its authority from the obligatory character of those moral laws, and being just or
unjust according as it agrees with, or differs from them. This, like all other popular
conceptions, is inadequate for scientific purposes, and the jurist, so for at least as
he is also a scientist, is compelled to abandon it. For it is contradicted by the fact`s.
positive laws do not rest upon moral laws and common notions of justice furnish
no court of appeal from the decrees of the State. The average man confounds law
and morality, and identifies the rules of law with the principles of abstract justice.

5.0 CONCLUSION

Generally, legal rules are composite and are derived from heterogeneous source. In
Nigeria, if we examine all the legal perspective, we shall find that some of them
have come from personal laws and local custom, a good number of them are based
on foreign rules and principles mainly English, some are based on the logic or
political ideology and so on. Secondly, public opinion which greatly influences law
is made up of a number of things political ideas, economic theory, ethical
philosophy etc. These directly and indirectly influence law. Therefore, when so
many elements work in shaping the legal precepts, the matter cannot be put in such
a simple way as the relation between law and morals`, because a number of
factors join hands in influencing law, and morals is only one of them. However,
some observations can be made about the relationship between law and morals.

Law and Morals, act and react upon and mould each other. In the name of justice,
equity, good faith, and conscience` morals have in-filtered into the fabrics of law.
In judicial law making, in the interpretation of legal precepts, in exercising judicial
discretion as in awarding punishment moral considerations play a very important
role. Morals work as a restraint upon the power of the legislature because the
legislature cannot venture to make a law which is completely against the morals of
the society. Secondly, all human conduct and social relations cannot be regulated
and governed by law alone. A considerable number of them are regulated by
morals. A number of action and relations in the life of the community go on very
smoothly without any intervention by law. Their observance is secured by morals.
So far as the legal rules are concerned, it is not the legal sanction alone that ensure
their obedience but morals also help in it. Thus, morals perfect the law. In
marriage, so long as love persist, there is little need of law to rule the relations of
the husband and wife but the solicitor comes in through the door, as love flies out
of the window.

                                                              20
Now, sociological approach has got its impact upon the modern age. This approach
is more concerned with the ends that law has to pursue. Thus, recognized values,
or, in other words, morals of course the morals of the modern age have become a
very important subject of study for good law making. On international law also
morals are exercising a great influence. The brutalities and inhuman acts in World
Wars made the people to turn back to morals and efforts are being made to
establish standards and values which the nations must follow. Perhaps there is no
other so forceful ground to justify the Nuremberg Trials as morals. If the law is to
remain closer to the life of the people and effective, it must not ignore morals.

6,0 TUTOR -MARKED ASSIGNMENT:

1. What do you understand the word law, give at least two definition of law and
distinguish law from morality.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING

Ahmad, Ahmad Atif. "Lawyers: Islamic Law" (PDF). Oxford Encyclopedia of
Legal History. Oxford University Press. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26
March 2009.

Akhlaghi, Behrooz (2005). "Iranian Commercial Law and the New Investment
Law FIPPA". In Yassari, Nadjma. The Shara in the Constitutions of Afghanistan,
Iran, and Egypt. Mohr Siebeck. ISBN 3-16-148787-7.

Albrow, Martin (1970). Bureaucracy (Key Concepts in Political Science). London:
Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-11262-8.

Anderson, J.N.D. (January 1956). "Law Reform in the Middle East". International
Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944--). 32 (1): 43­51.
JSTOR 2607811. doi:10.2307/2607811.

Aristotle. Athenian Constitution. Trans. Frederic George Kenyon. Wikisource. See
original text in Perseus program.

                                                              21
Barzilai, Gad (2003), Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal
Identities. The University of Michigan Press, 2003. Second print 2005 ISBN 0-
472-11315-1

Auby, Jean-Bernard (2002). "Administrative Law in France". In Stroink, F.A.M.;
Seerden, René. Administrative Law of the European Union, its Member States and
the United States. Intersentia. ISBN 90-5095-251-8.

UNIT 2: THE NATURE OF LAW IN SOCIETY
1.0 INTRODUCTION
There are two kinds of law. One is based on Justice. The other is based
on control. The predominant form in use today, and which has the greater
ancient heritage, is the latter. Basically, what the vast majority of
individuals view as law today is a bastardization of the Golden Rule: It is
the law of control, of raw power, of "might making right". It is retribution,
instead of restoration.
Consider our current body of laws. They define what is permissible and
what isn't. If there is no law on the books for a particular act, then no
matter how damaging or hurtful it is to others, then there is no crime. But if
there is a law which defines a crime for an action which harms no one, a
crime has indeed been committed. In the latter case, the State then claims
injury to "the peace and dignity" of the State. Barn carpeting! Such a State
has no "peace and dignity" when they would enforce victimless crimes.
2.0 OBJECTIVE
At the end of this unit you will be able to understand:
*the nature of law
*universal in character of law

                                                              22
*know the natural and sociological schools

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

This general question about the nature of law presupposes that law is a unique
social-political phenomenon, with more or less universal characteristics that can be
discerned through philosophical analysis. General jurisprudence, as this
philosophical inquiry about the nature of law, is meant to be universal. It assumes
that law possesses certain features, and it possesses them by its very nature, or
essence, as law, whenever and wherever it happens to exist. However, even if there
are such universal characteristics of law which is controversial, as we will later
discuss the reasons for a philosophical interest in elucidating them remain to be
explained.

First, there is the sheer intellectual interest in understanding such a complex social
phenomenon which is, after all, one of the most intricate aspects of human culture.
Law, however, is also a normative social practice: it purports to guide human
behaviour, giving rise to reasons for action. An attempt to explain this normative,
reason-giving aspect of law is one of the main challenges of general jurisprudence.
These two sources of interest in the nature of law are closely linked. Law is not the
only normative domain in our culture; morality, religion, social conventions,
etiquette, and so on, also guide human conduct in many ways which are similar to
law. Therefore, part of what is involved in the understanding of the nature of law
consists in an explanation of how law differs from these similar normative
domains, how it interacts with them, and whether its intelligibility depends on
other normative orders, like morality or social conventions.

Law, in its most general and comprehensive sense, signifies a rule of action; and is
applied indiscriminately to all kinds of action, whether animate or inanimate,
rational or irrational. Thus we say, the laws of motion, of gravitation, of optics, or
mechanics, as well as the laws of nature and of nations. And it is that rule of
action, which is prescribed by some superior, and which the inferior is bound to
obey.

This then is the general signification of law, a rule of action dictated by some
superior being: and, in those creatures that have neither the power to think, nor to
will, such laws must be invariably obeyed, so long as the creature itself subsists,
for its existence depends on that obedience. But laws, in their more confined sense,
and in which it is our present business to consider them, denote the rules, not of
action in general, but of human action or conduct: that is, the precepts by which

                                                              23
man, the noblest of all sublunary beings, a creature endowed with both reason and
freewill, is commanded to make use of those faculties in the general regulation of
his behavior.

Man, considered as a creature, must necessarily be subject to the laws of his
creator, for he is entirely a dependent being. A being, independent of any other, has
no rule to pursue, but such as he prescribes to himself; but a state of dependence
will inevitably oblige the inferior to take the will of him, on whom he depends, as
the rule of his conduct: not indeed in every particular, but in all those points
wherein his dependence consists. This principle therefore has more or less extent
and effect, in proportion as the superiority of the one and the dependence of the
other is greater or less, absolute or limited. And consequently, as man depends
absolutely upon his maker for everything, it is necessary that he should in all points
conform to his maker`s will.

The law of nature, being coeval with mankind and dictated by God himself, is of
course superior in obligation to any other. It is binding over all the globe in all
countries, and at all times; no human laws are of any validity, if contrary to this:
and such of them as are valid derive all their force, and all their authority,
mediately or immediately, from this original.

But in order to apply this to the particular exigencies of each individual, it is still
necessary to have recourse to reason; whose office it is to discover, as was before
observed, what the law of nature directs in every circumstance of life: by
considering, what method will tend the most effectually to our own substantial
happiness. And if our reason were always, as in our first ancestor before his
transgression, clear and perfect, unruffled by passions, unclouded by prejudice,
unimpaired by disease or intemperance, the task would be pleasant and easy; we
should need no other guide but this. But every man now finds the contrary in his
own experience; that his reason is corrupt, and his understanding full of ignorance
and error.

Upon these two foundations, the law of nature and the law of revelation, depend all
human laws; that is to say, no human laws should be suffered to contradict these.
There are, it is true a great number of indifferent points, in which both the divine
law and the natural leave a man at his own liberty; but which are found necessary
for the benefit of society to be restrained within certain limits. And herein it is that
human laws have their greatest force and efficacy; for, with regard to such points
as are not indifferent, human laws are only declaratory of, and act in subordination
to, the former. To instance in the case of murder; this is expressly forbidden by the

                                                              24
divine, and demonstrably by the natural law; and from these prohibitions arises the
true unlawfulness of this crime. Those human laws that annex a punishment to it,
do not at all increase its moral guilt, or superadd any fresh obligation in foro
conscientiae [in the court of conscience] to abstain from its perpetration.

Municipal law, thus understood, is properly defined to be a rule of civil conduct
prescribed by the Supreme power in a state commanding what is right, and
prohibiting what is wrong. Let us endeavor to explain its several properties, as they
arise out of this definition.

Municipal law is also a rule of civil conduct. This distinguishes municipal law
from the natural, or revealed; the former of which is the rule of moral conduct, and
the latter not only the rule of moral conduct, but also the rule of faith. These regard
man as a creature, and point out his duty to God, to himself, and to his neighbor,
considered in the light of an individual. But municipal or civil law regards him also
as a citizen, and bound to other duties towards his neighbor, than those of mere
nature and religion: duties, which he has engaged in by enjoying the benefits of the
common union: and which amount to no more, than that he do contribute, on his
part, to the subsistence and peace of the society.

But farther: municipal law is a rule of civil conduct prescribed by the supreme
power in a state. For legislature, as was before observed, is the greatest act of
superiority that can be exercised by one being over another. Wherefore it is
requisite to the very essence of a law, that it be made by the supreme power.
Sovereignty and legislature are indeed convertible terms; one cannot subsist
without the other. This will naturally lead us into a short inquiry concerning the
nature of society and civil government; and the natural, inherent right that belongs
to the sovereignty of a state, wherever that sovereignty be lodged, of making and
enforcing laws.

For when civil society is once formed, government at the same time results of
course, as necessary to preserve and to keep that society in order. Unless some
superior be constituted, whose commands and decisions all the members are bound
to obey, they would still remain as in a state of nature, without any judge upon
earth to define their several rights, and redress their several wrongs. But, as all the
members which compose this society were naturally equal, it may be asked, in
whose hands are the reins of government to be entrusted? To this the general
answer is easy; but the application of it to particular cases has occasioned one half
of those mischiefs, which are apt to proceed from misguided political zeal. In
general, all mankind will agree that government should be reposed in such persons,

                                                              25
in whom those qualities are most likely to be found, the perfection of which is
among the attributes of him who is emphatically styled the supreme being; the
three grand requisites, I mean, of wisdom, of goodness, and of power: wisdom, to
discern the real interest of the community: goodness, to endeavor always to pursue
that real interest; and strength, or power, to carry this knowledge and intention into
action. These are the natural foundations of sovereignty, and these are the
requisites that ought to be found in every well-constituted frame of government.

By the sovereign power, as was before observed, is meant the making of laws; for
wherever that power resides, all others must conform to, and be directed by it,
whatever appearance the outward form and administration of the government may
put on. For it is at any time in the option of the legislature to alter that form and
administration by a new edict or rule, and to put the execution of the laws into
whatever hands it pleases; by constituting one, or a few, or many executive
magistrates: and all the other powers of the state must obey the legislative power in
the discharge of their several functions, or else the constitution is at an end.

Thus far as to the right of the supreme power to make laws; but farther, it is its
duty likewise. For since the respective members are bound to conform themselves
to the will of the state, it is expedient that they receive directions from the state
declaratory of that its will

For this purpose every law may be said to consist of several parts: one, declaratory;
whereby the rights to be observed, and the wrongs to be eschewed, are clearly
defined and laid down: another, directory: whereby the subject is instructed and
enjoined to observe those rights, and to abstain from the commission of those
wrongs: a third, remedial: whereby a method is pointed out to recover a man`s
private rights, or redress his private wrongs; to which may be added a fourth,
usually termed the sanction, or vindicatory branch of the law; whereby it is
signified what evil or penalty shall be incurred by such as commit any public
wrongs, and transgress or neglect their duty.

With regard to the sanction of laws, or the evil that may attend the breach of public
duties; it is observed, that human legislators have for the most part chosen to make
the sanction of their laws rather vindicatory than remunerator, or to consist rather
in punishments, than in actual particular rewards

Natural Law Theory

Natural law is a philosophy asserting that certain rights are inherent by virtue of
human nature endowed by nature; traditionally God or a transcendent source, and

                                                              26
can be understood universally through human reason. As determined by nature, the
law of nature is implied to be universal, existing independently of the positive law
of a given political order, society or nation-state. Natural law theory is strongly
associated with classical and medieval thought, especially Aristotle, Roman
jurisprudence, and St. Thomas Aquinas. There are several challenges associated
with the task of explicating natural law theory, and one of the most important tasks
of this introductory entry is simply to identify these challenges.

First, there are two interrelated but distinct views that are called natural law
theory. One is a view about the nature of morality: this view asserts that there are
natural moral laws, and it is not essential to this view that it take any particular
stand on the What is law? debate. A second view that is called natural law theory
is a theory about law as an institution or practice--that is the view that is implicated
in the What is law controversy.

Second, contemporary understandings of natural law theory have been strongly
influenced by the legal positivists critique. When the positivists articulated the
theory they were criticizing, their articulations of natural law theory were neither
charitable nor true to the natural law tradition. When Holmes referred to a
brooding omnipresence in the sky he was not offering a sympathetic or charitable
reading of the natural law tradition. For the purposes of this broad overview, we
might use the latin phrase lex injusta est non lex as a starting point. Natural law
theory could be understood as affirming something like the following:

An unjust law is not a true law.

This formulation differs from a literal translation--an unjust law is not a
law. Formulated in that way, natural law theory seems to be committed to a
contradiction: something which is a law but also is unjust is not a law. The
quotation marks around Law and the phrase true law make it clear that natural law
theory is asserting something else, that something which might be called a law is
not in fact a law if it is unjust. Usually, this notion is accompanied by some
explication of the characteristics that are required for status as a true law, a focal
case of law, or perhaps valid law.

Moral Facts, Social Facts, and Legal Content

The contemporary approach to these issues is the product of almost sixty years of
thinking within the tradition that is sometimes called analytic
jurisprudence. Beginning with the work of H.L.A. Hart in the 1950s, through is
publication of The Concept of Law in 1961, and extending through Ronald

                                                              27
Dworkin's critique of Hart, and the reformulation of the positivist tradition by both
Joseph Raz and Jules Coleman, the basic issues and questions have gone through
several transformations.

One useful way to get get at the heart of these developments is to conceive of the
debate about the nature of law as centrally concerned with the relationship between
social facts, moral facts, and legal content. Our question is What determines legal
content? where legal content is simply understood as the content of the legal
norms.

By framing the What is law? debate in terms of the relationship between social
facts, moral facts, and legal content, the conceptual space we get precise mapping
of the conceptual space. In the rest of this Lexicon entry, we will take a somewhat
less shallow look at the three options.

The sociological school of law

The roots of the sociology of law can be traced back to the works of sociologists
and jurists of the turn of the previous century. The relationship between law and
society was sociologically explored in the seminal works of both Max Weber and
Émile Durkheim. The writings on law by these classical sociologists are
foundational to the entire sociology of law today. A number of other scholars,
mainly jurists, also employed social scientific theories and methods in an attempt
to develop sociological theories of law. Notably among these were Leon
Petrazycki, Eugen Ehrlich and Georges Gurvitch.

In Fundamental Principles of the Sociology of Law, Eugen Ehrlich developed a
sociological approach to the study of law by focusing on how social networks and
groups organized social life. He explored the relationship between law and general
social norms and distinguished between positive law, consisting of the compulsive
norms of state requiring official enforcement, and living law, consisting of the
rules of conduct that people in fact obeyed and which dominated social life. The
latter emerged spontaneously as people interacted with each other to form social
associations.

Contemporary Natural Law Theory

The positivist critique of classical natural law theory resulted in a major
restatement by John Finnis. Finnis's theory is subtle and complex and no
thumbnail sketch can do it full justice, but for the purpose of the Lexicon, one of
his ideas can serve to illustrate the flavor of his theory. Finnis argues that the

                                                              28
natural-law claim that an unjust law is not a true law can be explicated via the idea
of the focal meaning of law. This argument that concedes that unjust enactments
are laws in a sense, but that that the focal sense of law is limited to laws that are
not unjust. Finnis's position has both critics and defenders, but his magisterial
book Natural Law and Natural Rightsis must reading for anyone interested in
contemporary natural law theory.

There are two kinds of law. One is based on Justice. The other is based
on control. The predominant form in use today, and which has the greater
ancient heritage, is the latter. Basically, what the vast majority of
individuals view as law today is a bastardization of the Golden Rule: Dem
wid de gold, makes de rules. It is the law of control, of raw power, of might
making right. It is retribution, instead of restoration.

Law, in its most general and comprehensive sense, signifies a rule of action; and is
applied indiscriminately to all kinds of action, whether animate or inanimate,
rational or irrational. Thus we say, the laws of motion, of gravitation, of optics, or
mechanics, as well as the laws of nature and of nations. And it is that rule of
action, which is prescribed by some superior, and which the inferior is bound to
obey.

The fairest and most rational method to interpret the will of the legislator, is by
exploring his intentions at the time when the law was made, by signs the most
natural and probable. And these signs are either the words, the context, the subject-
matter, the effects and consequence, or the spirit and reason of the law. Let us take
a short view of them all.

1. Words are generally to be understood in their usual and most known
signification; not so much regarding the propriety of grammar, as their general and
popular use. Thus the law mentioned by Pufendorf, which forbad a layman to lay
hands on a priest, was adjudged to extend to him, who had hurt a priest with a
weapon. Again; terms of art, or technical terms, must be taken according to the
acceptation of the learned in each art, trade, and science

2. If words happen to be still dubious, we may establish their meaning from the
context; with which it may be of singular use to compare a word, or a sentence,
whenever they are ambiguous, equivocal, or intricate. Thus the preamble, is often
called in to help the construction of an act of parliament

                                                              29
3. As to the subject-matter, words are always to be understood as having a regard
thereto; for that is always supposed to be in the eye of the legislator, and all his
expressions directed to that end. Thus, when a law of our Edward III. forbids all
ecclesiastical persons to purchase provisions at Rome, it might seem to prohibit the
buying of grain and other victuals.

4. As to the effects and consequence, the rule is, that where words bear either none,
or a very absurd signification, if literally understood, we must a little deviate from
the received sense of them. Therefore the Bolognian law, mentioned by Pufendorf,
which enacted that whoever drew blood in the streets should be punished with the
utmost severity, was held after a long debate not to extend to the surgeon, who
opened the vein of a person that fell down in the street with a fit.

5. lastly, the most universal and effectual way of discovering the true meaning of a
law, when the words are dubious, is by considering the reason and spirit of it; or
the cause which moved the legislator to enact it. For when this reason ceases, the
law itself ought likewise to cease with it.

4.0 SUMMARY

Laws of Nature are to be distinguished both from Scientific Laws and from
Natural Laws. Neither Natural Laws, as invoked in legal or ethical theories, nor
Scientific Laws, which some researchers consider to be scientists' attempts to state
or approximate the Laws of Nature, will be discussed in this article. Instead, it
explores issues in contemporary metaphysics. Within metaphysics, there are two
competing theories of Laws of Nature. On one account, the Regularity Theory,
Laws of Nature are statements of the uniformities or regularities in the world; they
are mere descriptions of the way the world is. On the other account, the
Necessitarian Theory, Laws of Nature are the principles which govern the natural
phenomena of the world. That is, the natural world obeys the Laws of Nature. This
seemingly innocuous difference marks one of the most profound gulfs within
contemporary philosophy, and has quite unexpected, and wide-ranging,
implications.

Some of these implications involve accidental truths, false existential, the
correspondence theory of truth, and the concept of free will. Perhaps the most
important implication of each theory is whether the universe is a cosmic
coincidence or driven by specific, eternal laws of nature. Each side takes a
different stance on each of these issues, and to adopt either theory is to give up one
or more strong beliefs about the nature of the world.

                                                              30
Law, in its most general and comprehensive sense, signifies a rule of action; and is
applied indiscriminately to all kinds of action, whether animate or inanimate,
rational or irrational. Thus we say, the laws of motion, of gravitation, of optics, or
mechanics, as well as the laws of nature and of nations. And it is that rule of
action, which is prescribed by some superior, and which the inferior is bound to
obey.

Thus when the supreme being formed the universe, and created matter out of
nothing, he impressed certain principles upon that matter, from which it can never
depart, and without which it would cease to be. When he put that matter into
motion, he established certain laws of motion, to which all movable bodies must
conform. And, to descend from the greatest operations to the smallest, when a
workman forms a clock, or other piece of mechanism, he establishes at his own
pleasure certain arbitrary laws for its direction; as that the hand shall describe a
given space in a given time; to which law as long as the work conforms, so long it
continues in perfection, and answers the end of its formation.

5.0 CONCLUSION

Natural law is a philosophy asserting that certain rights are inherent by virtue of
human nature endowed by nature; traditionally God or a transcendent source, and
can be understood universally through human reason. As determined by nature, the
law of nature is implied to be universal, existing independently of the positive law
of a given political order, society or nation-state.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT :

1. Discuss five nature of law in a democratic society today.

2. Discuss natural law theory and the sociological school of law.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING

Albrow, Martin (1970). Bureaucracy (Key Concepts in Political Science). London:
Palgrave Macmillan. ISBN 0-333-11262-8.

Anderson, J.N.D. (January 1956). "Law Reform in the Middle East". International
Affairs (Royal Institute of International Affairs 1944--). 32 (1): 43­51.
JSTOR 2607811. 10.2307/2607811.

                                                              31
Aristotle. Athenian Constitution. Trans. Frederic George Kenyon. Wikisource. See
original text in Perseus program.
Barzilai, Gad (2003), Communities and Law: Politics and Cultures of Legal
Identities. The University of Michigan Press, 2003. Second print 2005 ISBN 0-
472-11315-1
Auby, Jean-Bernard (2002). "Administrative Law in France". In Stroink, F.A.M.;
Seerden, René. Administrative Law of the European Union, its Member States and
the United States. Intersentia. ISBN 90-5095-251-8

UNIT 3: THE SOURCES OF NIGERIAN LAW
1.0 INTRODUCTION
The law is an abstract term. In order to know what comprises the law, you have to
derive it from various places. These places from which the law is derived are aptly
described as the sources of law. Sources of law can be definedas the places to
which a legal practitioner or a judge turns to in order to answer a legal problem.
They can be regarded as springboards from which law emanates. They are the
various vehicles through which the law is carried. The sources of Nigerian law can
be divided into primary and secondary.
2.0 OBJECTIVE
At the end of this unit you will be able to:
*Understand the sources of law
*Know what are the primary and secondary sources of law
3.0 MAIN CONTENT

                                                              32
Primary sources of Nigerian law can simply be regarded as those sources whose
provisions are binding on all courts throughout Nigeria. They include:

   1. Received English law
   2. Case law
   3. Nigerian legislation
   4. Customary laws.
   5. International laws.

On the other hand, the secondary sources of Nigerian law are the indirect ways
through which we get our law. Save for law reports, secondary sources of Nigerian
law are of persuasive authority in the law courts. Law reports are only authoritative
due to the fact that they serve as the vehicle through which judicial precedent is
carried. Examples of secondary sources of law are:

   1. Law Reports
   2. Text Books and Treatises
   3. Periodicals, Journals, and Legal Digests
   4. Casebooks
   5. Legal Dictionaries
   6. Newspapers

The distinction between primary and secondary sources of law is very useful in
determining authorities to follow in the law courts. If a case is brought before a
court and one party uses a primary source of law as his authority while the other
makes use of secondary sources, the scale of justice would tilt in favour of the
person who presents primary sources of law.

Secondary sources of law are only made use of whenever there are no primary
sources of law to fall back on.

The sources of Nigerian Law are as follows:

1. The Constitution

The Nigerian Constitution is a Federal one. A federal constitution is one which
provides for division of powers between the constituents of the Federal
Government.

The Nigerian Constitution is supreme. Constitutional supremacy relates to the
supremacy of authority of the constitution over other laws. Section 1(1) provides,

                                                              33
this Constitution and its provisions shall have binding force on all authorities and
persons throughout the Federal Republic of Nigeria. In addition to this, Section
1(3) provides, if any other law is inconsistent with the provisions of this
Constitution, this Constitution shall prevail and that other law shall to the extent of
the inconsistency be void. The current Constitution is the 1999 Constitution. It
came into operations on 29th May, 1999.

By virtue of section 13(2)(b), the security and welfare of the people is the primary
purpose of the government. Sections 15-21 set out the various ways in ensuring
that this purpose is fulfilled without violating the fundamental rights of the citizens
which are set out in Chapter 4 of the Constitution. These rights include, the right to
life, right to dignity of persons, right to personal liberty, right to fair hearing, right
to private and family life, right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion,
right to freedom of expression and the press, right to peaceful assembly and
association, right to freedom of movement, right to freedom from discrimination
and the right to acquire and own immovable property anywhere in Nigeria.

2. Legislation

The Constitution regulates the distribution of legislative business between the
National Assembly which has power to make laws for the Federation and the
House of Assembly of each state of the federation. The current legislation in force
at the Federal level is largely contained in the Laws of the Federation of Nigeria
2004 (LFN). Laws made subsequently are found in the annual volumes of the laws
of the Federal Republic Nigeria. Federal laws enacted under the military regime
known as Decrees and state laws known as Edicts form the bulk of primary
legislations.

3. English Law

This consists of:

   a. The received English Law comprising of the following, the common law, the
       doctrine of equity, statutes of general application in force in England on
       January 1, 1900, Statutes and subsidiary legislation on specified matters, and

   b. English statutes made before 1st October, 1960 and extending to Nigeria
       which are not yet repealed. Laws made by the local colonial legislature are
       treated as part of the Nigerian legislation.

Despite the influence of English law, the Nigerian legal system is very complex
because of legal pluralism. Legal pluralism is the existence of multiple legal

                                                              34
systems within one geographic area. It occurs when different laws govern different
groups within a country or where, to an extent, the legal systems of the indigenous
population have been given some recognition. Legal pluralism is prevalent in
former colonies, where the law of a former colonial authority may exist alongside
traditional legal systems. This is evident in the Nigerian Legal system where the
customary law exists side by side with the inherited English Legal System.

4. Customary Law

This emanated from the usage and practices of the people. The traditional
classification of customary law is into the following categories:

Ethnic/ Non ­ Muslim: is the indigenous law that applies to the members of the
different ethnic groups. Nigeria is made up of several ethnic groups each with its
own variety of customary law. Ethnic Customary law is unwritten, uncertain and
difficult to ascertain. Ethnic Customary law is enforced in customary courts.
These courts are at the lowest rung of the hierarchy of courts and in most cases are
presided over by non- legally trained personnel.

Muslim Law / Sharia: In the southern part of the country, Muslim/ Islamic law,
where it exists, is integrated into and has always been treated as an aspect of the
customary law. Islamic law has however been in use in the Northern part of the
country since 1959. Islamic/Sharia/Muslim Law is written with clearly defined and
articulated principles. It is based on the Islamic religion and was introduced in
Nigeria as a consequence of a successful process of Islamization. It is based on the
Holy Koran and the teachings of the Prophet Mohammad. The Muslim laws, also
known as the Sharia are found in the Holy Koran and the Hadith, teachings of the
Prophet Mohammad.

5. Judicial Precedent

This is an earlier happening, decision, etc, taken as an example or rule for what
comes up later. The doctrine of precedent is founded on the objective of law that
ensures that like cases are decided alike. The operation of the doctrine is tied to the
hierarchy of the courts. A court is bound by the decisions of any court above it in
the hierarchy and usually by a court of co-ordinate or equivalent jurisdiction. The
Supreme Court is the highest court of the land. The Court of Appeal is the
penultimate court to entertain appeals from the High Courts, which are the trial
courts of general jurisdiction. The Court of Appeal and all lower courts are bound
by the decision of the Supreme Court. The judicial precedent does not apply to
certain courts like the customary/area courts and the sharia courts. The Federal and

                                                              35
State courts are not in two parallel lines. It is only to a limited extent that it may be
asserted that each state has its own legal system.

6. International Law

Nigeria is a member of the United Nations, the Commonwealth of Nations, African
Union and many others.Although Nigeria is a signatory to various international
conventions and covenants, these are not enforceable in Nigeria unless they are
enacted into law by the National Assembly.

7. Government Bodies

The system of Government in the FRN is modelled after the American presidential
system with three arms of government, namely, the legislature, the executive and
the judiciary. This is known as separation of powers. The legislature makes the
law, the executive implements the law, while the judiciary interprets the law.

Legislature

Section 4 (1) of the Constitution provides that the legislative powers of the country
shall be vested in the National Assembly. By virtue of sub section (2), the National
Assembly has powers to make laws for the peace, order and good government of
the federation, to the exclusion of the state House of Assembly. It follows law
making procedures as specified in sections 58 and 59 of the 1999 Constitution. It is
bicameral and is made up of the Senate and the House of Representatives. The
powers of the National Assembly to legislate refer to:

Any matter included in the Exclusive Legislative list, to the exclusion of the State
House of Assembly.

Any matter in the concurrent legislature list set out in the 1st column of Part II of
the 2nd Schedule of the Constitution to the extent prescribed in the 2nd Column
opposite; and

Any other matter with respect to which the National Assembly is empowered to
make laws in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

Each state has its own law making organ known as the House of Assembly. State
House of Assemblies have powers to legislate on any matter in the concurrent
legislative list and any other matter with respect to which it is empowered to make
laws in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution.

                                                              36
By virtue of S.4 (5), where there is inconsistency between the laws made by the
State House of Assembly and the National Assembly, the latter prevails and the
former, to the extent of the inconsistency becomes void. It pertinent to note that
scientific and technological research, this includes health research, falls within
items on the concurrent list. Consequently, both the National Assembly and the
State House of Assembly may make laws governing research ethics in Nigeria.

Executive

The executive power of the Federation is vested in the President by virtue of
section 5(1) of the 1999 Constitution. Such powers can be administered directly or
through the Vice President or Ministers or officers of the government. In the states
the executive power of a state is vested in the Governor and may through the
Deputy Governor or Commissioners or other public officers.

Judiciary

By virtue of section 6(1) of the 1999 Constitution, the following courts are
established in the Federal Republic of Nigeria, Supreme Court, Court of Appeal,
Federal High Court, High Court, Abuja, High Court of a State, the Sharia Court of
Appeal of the FCT, Abuja, a Sharia Court of Appeal of a state, the Customary
Court of Appeal of the FCT, Abuja and the Customary Court of Appeal. The courts
established by the Constitution are the only superior courts of record in Nigeria.
The Constitution empowers the National Assembly and the House of Assembly to
establish courts with subordinate jurisdiction to the High Court. These courts are
invariably inferior courts of record notwithstanding the status of the officer
presiding in the courts.

Statutory Institutions

Apart from the arms of government set up by the Constitution, there are
institutions/ governmental bodies which are creation of statutes. These institutions
such as the National Health Research Committee, and National Agency for Food
and Drugs Administration and Control, are allowed to make rules, regulations,
directives and bylaws pursuant to their enabling Acts and consequently are
binding. These institutions are also empowered to institute various committees as
necessary in carrying out their duties. Procedures devised for these committees
have binding effects on all parties concerned.

The legal basis for research ethics in Nigeria as with all other area of laws is
created either through legislation which are called statutory law or by opinions

                                                              37
written by judges in court cases which is called case law.Statutory laws influencing
research ethics in Nigeria can be found in the Constitution; state and local
government legislations; federal enactments regulations, codes, directives and
international treaties. Some of these legislations have their basis in customary law
and practices.

Case law comprises of decisions of the various courts on matters brought under
different heads of the common law such as contractand Torts. These decisions
determine the outcome of individual cases thereby providing precedents to be
followed in the interpretation of statutory laws and the Constitution.

4.0 SUMMARY

There are numerous sources of law, including constitutions, legislatures,
executives, judiciaries, administrative agencies, and international organizations.
The first source of law is constitutional law. one constitutions is applicable in
every state: the federal or state goverment, which is in force throughout Nigeria,
and the state`s constitution. The nigeria Constitution created our legal system.
States` constitutions typically focus on issues of local concern. The purpose of a
constitutions is to regulate government action. Private individuals are protected by
the Constitution, but they do not have to follow it themselves. The origins from
which particular positive laws derive their authority and coercive force. Such are
constitutions, treaties, statutes, usages, and customs. In another sense, the
authoritative or reliable works, records, documents, edicts, etc. to which we are to
look for an understanding of what constitutes the law. Such, for example, with
reference to the Boman law, are the compilations of Justinian and the treatise of
Gains; and such, with reference to the common law, are especially the ancient
reports and the works of such writers as Bracton, Littleton, Coke, Fleta, and others.

5.0 CONCLUSION

The power of making all laws is in the people or their representatives, and none
can have any force whatever, which is derived from any other source. But it is not
required that the legislator shall expressly pass upon all laws, and give the sanction
of his seal, before they can have life or existence. The laws are therefore such as
have received ala express sanction, and such as derive their force and effect from
implication. The first, or express, are the constitution, Acts and Laws and the
treaties and acts of the legislature which have been made by virtue of the authority
vested by the constitution. To these must be added the constitution of the state and
the laws made by the state legislature, or by other subordinate legislative bodies,

                                                              38
by virtue of the authority conveyed by such constitution. The latter, or tacit,
received their effect by the general use of them by the people, when they assume
the name of customs by the adoption of rules by the courts from systems of foreign
laws.
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:
Discuss the sources of Nigerian law and gives examples of each.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING
Goltzberg, Stefan (2016). Les Sources du droit. Paris: Presses Universitaires de
France. ISBN 2130748600.
Slapper & Kelly - English Legal System - Routledge-Cavendish - 2008 - page 65
Dualist jurisdictions require ratification of treaties; "monist" jurisdictions do not.
For instance the Maritime Labour Convention entered into force on 20 August
2013, one year after registering 30 ratifications of countries representing over 33
per cent of the world gross tonnage of ships
Brussels is the Commission, the Council of Ministers & the European Parliament
acting in concert
The Judicature Acts 1873-75 abolished the Courts of Chancery. Chancery
Division of the High Court succeeds the old Courts of Chancery
Edward Coke's Institutes of the Lawes of England, William Blackstone's
Commentaries on the Laws of England, and similar texts.

                                                              39
UNIT 4: HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF NIGERIAN CONSTITUTION

1.0 INTRODUCTION

A constitution is a set of fundamental principles or established precedents
according to which a state or other organization is governed. These rules together
make up, i.e. constitute, what the entity is. When these principles are written down
into a single document or set of legal documents, those documents may be said to
embody a written constitution; if they are written down in a single comprehensive
document, it is said to embody a codified constitution. Some constitutions such as
the constitution of the United Kingdom are uncodified, but written in numerous
fundamental Acts of a legislature, court cases or treaties.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

At the end of the unit you will be able to explain:

*The constitution as a source of law

*How constitution regulating government organs and states

*Constitutional development of Nigeria

*Military influence and the impact of law in the society

*the doctrine of separation of powers.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

                                                              40
Nigeria is an internationally recognized sovereign nation made up of 36 states and
a Federal Capital Territory, Abuja. Each of those 36 states is empowered by
Nigeria`s Constitution to establish and maintain a legal system that would assure
justice within the assigned territory so as to enable every citizen and other persons
resident in it carry on their legitimate everyday pursuits. Together, the
Constitution, the individual legal system of Nigeria's 36 States,- coupled with laws
made by the Federal Legislature for the entire nation or for the Federal Capital
Territory as well as Nigeria's treaty obligations, make up the Nigerian legal
complex.

As a legal complex with varying legal standards, the Constitution provides the
ultimate principles, rules and doctrines from which the legitimacy and hierarchy of
all other legal norms in Nigeria are validated.

Nigeria Constitutional historical Development

Nigeria is a creation of the Constitution. Nigeria grew into an internationally
recognised independent nation, in 1960, after a period of colonialism under the
British government which spanned about a century beginning with the formal
annexation of Lagos in 1861. Nigeria`s constitutional development history can be
divided into two epochs or generations: the colonial or pre-independence epoch ­
which covers 6 constitutional instruments (1914, 1922, 1946, 1951, 1954 and
1960) and the post-independence constitutional epochs (encompassing 3
instruments - 1963, 1979 and 1999. While each successive pre-independence
constitutional instrument was enacted through an order-in-council of the British
monarch, their post-independence counterparts were enacted in two ways: an Act
of parliament 1963 Constitution and military decree..

The one Nigeria constitution began in 1914 with the Frederick Lugard
Constitution. The 1914 Constitution amalgamated the Colony and Protectorate of
Southern Nigeria with the Protectorate of Northern Nigeria under the colonial
authority of the British Monarch. The emergent entity was administered under the
authority of the British monarch through her appointed agent: a Governor-General.
Lord Frederick Lugard was the 1st Governor-General of amalgamated Nigeria. The
1914 Constitution created a Legislative Council of the Colony which was however
restricted to making laws for the Colony of Lagos alone, whilst the Governor
General made laws for the rest of the country.

Eight years later, the 1914 Constitution was replaced by the 1922 Sir Clifford
Constitution. Notably, the latter Constitution established a 46 member Legislative

                                                              41
Council which was given law making responsibilities for the Colony of Lagos and

the southern provinces. The Council had 27 members including the Governor, the

Lieutenant-Governors, other elected and nominated members including three

representing Lagos as the administrative and commercial capital and one

representing Calabar as a big commercial centre. Notably, the 1922 Constitution

introduced, for the first time in any British African territory, the elective principle

with Lagos and Calabar being granted the franchise to elect their representatives to

the         Legislative  Council.

1946 saw the adoption of the Arthur Richard Constitution which defined Nigeria,
for the first time, in terms of regions - thus dividing the still colonised country into
three main regions: the Northern, Western and Eastern regions. This constitution
came into effect after the Second World War ­ an event which had a significant
effect on constitutional reforms relating to the governance of colonial Nigeria, and
indeed Africa as a whole, as returning African heroes of the war who were
conscripted to fight on the side of the British returned with a deeper understanding
of national freedom and international sovereignty. In addition, the charter of the
United Nations which was adopted after the war made strong reference to the
freedom of colonised people under the principle of respect for self-determination.

The chain of events culminated in the formation of the National Council for

Nigeria and Cameroons, which later became the National Council of Nigerian

Citizens, (N.C.N.C), an organization which engaged in the active mobilization of

the indigenous peoples of Nigeria to harness the global tide in favour of self-

determination and political independence from the shackles of colonialism. The

1946 Constitution was thus a compromise instrument on the part of the British

colonialist designed to establish a constitutional framework in which all sections of

Nigeria could be represented on the Legislative Council and which guarantees an

unofficial majority both in the House of Assembly and in the legislative council for

indigenous               Nigerians.

Five years later, the 1946 Richards Constitution was again ditched in favour of the
1951 Sir John Macpherson Constitution. Whereas its successor suffered from the
charge of being an imposition of the British colonialists without any input from the
indigenous people of Nigeria, the 1951 Macpherson Constitution came into being
after an unprecedented process of consultation with the peoples of Nigeria.
According to Dikemgba no other constitution so widely reached out to the people
than the Macpherson constitution of 1951. Instructively, meetings and
consultations leading down to its making were held at 5 levels ­ Village, District,
Divisional, Provincial and Regional levels before the national conference. The

                                                              42
regional conferences were held at Ibadan, Enugu and Kaduna, respectively and
produced a general consensus in favour of a federal system of government with a
few differences as to its format. The emergent Constitution represented a major
advancement on the old constitutional order by introducing African elected
majorities in the Central Legislature and in the Regional Houses of Assembly;
endowing the legislative houses with independent legislative power in many area
of state activity; and establishing a federal system for Nigeria for the first time.

Nonetheless, within three years of its operation, it soon became clear that the

expansion of the political space and regional identities fostered by the 1951

Constitution were not backed up by the requisite institutional framework or

insightful national leadership for the management of inherent and other tensions or

conflict, at the national and regional levels, which followed its enactment. In the

wake of reports of violent eruptions in the northern city of Kano which pitched

northerners against southerners leading to massive loss of lives and property, the

then British Secretary of State for the Colonies, Oliver Lyttleton stepped in by

inviting the leaders of various political parties in Nigeria to attend a conference in

London, in 1953. The outcome of that conference and another cycle of conference

and  consultations  which  followed  was  the:.

The 1954 Constitution, among others, made regional governments independent of
the central government in respect of subjects and legislative powers allocated to
them. It also established a unicameral legislature for the federal government and
each of the 3 regional governments. In addition, Lagos was taken out of the control
of any regional government and made the Federal Capital Territory; regional
public services were established for each of the 3 regions; the judiciary was
reorganised so as to establish regional judiciaries while autonomy was granted to
the Southern Cameroons which was up till that time part of a larger Nigeria and
Northern Cameroons. Specifically, for the first time, Ministers were given specific
portfolios. Thus, the Lyttleton Constitution could best be described as the transition
instrument towards Nigeria`s independence in 1960 under a federal structure with
democratically elected federal and regional legislature.

In 1960, Nigeria was granted political independence as a sovereign state under the
1960 Constitution which provided for a parliamentary system of government, 3
regions Northern, Eastern and Western Regions, a bicameral legislative framework
at the federal Senate and House of Representatives and regional levels House of
Assembly and House of Chiefs with the legislative powers of government
delineated into three categories or lists - exclusive, concurrent and residual. The
parliamentary system designed under the 1960 constitution recognized the British

                                                              43
monarch as the Head of State with powers to appoint a resident agent- the

Governor-General- to exercise executive powers on her behalf while a Prime

Minister elected by the federal parliament acted as the Head of the federal

Executive Council. The Constitution also took steps to define Nigerian

citizenship` while outlining constitutionally protected rights for citizens and

persons             in        Nigeria.

However, by designating the Governor-General as a representative and agent of the

British Queen or Monarch ­ instead of the People of the independent and sovereign

state of Nigeria, the effect was to render Nigeria a dominion territory ­ a status

which contradicted the very nature and basis of the independence claimed in 1960.

In addition, the 1960 Constitution denied Nigeria an effective dominion over its

judicial powers as it gave final appellate authority over Nigeria to the Privy

Council established by the British Queen instead of the Federal Supreme Court and

its judges. Those fundamental derogations from Nigeria`s sovereignty and other

observed challenges in implementing the Independence Constitution led to the

enactment  of  the      1963  Constitution.

Thus, the key features of the 1963 Constitution included the establishment of
Nigeria`s 1st republic under a parliamentary system of government by replacing
the Governor-General appointed by the British monarch with a President elected
directly by members of the Nigerian federal legislature. In addition, in place of the
Privy Council, the Federal Supreme Court became designated as the final appellate
judicial authority over any person or matter in Nigeria while steps were taken to
strengthen the independence of the judiciary even further.

In 1966, that Constitution was, however, set aside by a violent military coup d`etat
which supplanted the 1st Republic with military dictatorship which was to last for
about 13 years including the civil war period 1966-1969, under 4 military Heads of
State, ending only in 1979 when the General Olusegun Obasanjo military
administration ushered in the 2nd Republic with the promulgation of a new
Constitution.

The 1979 Constitution set up Nigeria under a presidential system of government
with a federal government, 19 state governments, a federal capital territory, 3 arms
and 3 levels of government. Like the 1963 Constitution, the life-span of the 1979
Constitution was abruptly terminated on 31st December, 1983 when the civilian
administration of President Shehu Shagari and Vice President Alex Ekwueme was
toppled and replaced by the military dictatorship of Generals Muhammed Buhari
and Tunde Idiagbon. That regime seeded 3 other extra-constitutional regimes the

                                                              44
General Ibrahim Babangida military dictatorship 1985-1993, Mr. Ernest Shonekan
interim civilian-led regime, General Sani Abacha military dictatorship 1993-1998
and General Abdulsalami Abubakar military administration which successfully
ushered in the 3rd Republic on the 27th of May, 1999 with the introduction of the
1999 Constitution.

Nigerian Courts could generally be classified as:

1. Tribunals for the Federation: These include all Courts which original or
   appellate jurisdictions extend to persons or matters throughout the entire
   federation. For instance, apart from their original jurisdictions, the Appeal
   Court and the Supreme Court, in that order, act as the last two appellate
   authorities over decisions emanating from any of the courts of the 36 States of
   Nigeria/FCT as well as the Federal High Court, the National Industrial Court,
   the Code of Conduct Bureau, Investment and Securities Tribunal, Disciplinary
   Tribunals of Professional bodies and generally, the Election Tribunal.

   Some federation courts are not chiefly concerned with appeals. Rather, they are
   given, within their establishment statutes, original and review jurisdiction over
   matters vested in the Federal Government. These include:

       i. The Federal High Court, which except where stated otherwise through
               a federal legislation, is usually the court of first instance for all objects
               vested in the Federal Government and the Federal Capital Territory,
               Abuja under the Constitution;

       ii. National Industrial Courts: Under the Third Amendment to the 1999
               Constitution, the National Industrial Court is designated a specialized
               court of record with powers and jurisdiction encompassing full civil
               and criminal jurisdiction over labour, employment and industrial
               disputes in Nigeria. Apart from the traditional jurisdiction over trade
               disputes and trade union disputes. The Court also has jurisdiction to
               hear and determine cases of child abuse, child labour and human
               trafficking. Equally, cases relating to payment or non-payment of
               entitlements of judicial officers and political office holders in Nigeria
               can only be commenced at the National Industrial Court.

       iii. Investment and Securities Tribunal, (IST): was established under
               Section 224 of the Investments and Securities Act (ISA), 1999 and
               inaugurated on the 19th of December 2002 as a dedicated, specialized
               and fast-track civil court for the resolution of disputes arising from

                                                              45
               investments and securities transactions in an accessible, flexible,
               transparent, efficient and cost-effective manner. Additionally, Section
               93 of Pensions Reform Act, 2004, empowers the IST to adjudicate on
               pensions disputes in Nigeria. It is a major component of the reform of
               the Legal framework for the capital market and pensions
               administration in Nigeria;

       iv. Legally recognized Disciplinary Tribunals for various leading
               professions which jurisdiction are not restricted to any State but to
               members of the given profession throughout the Federation.

2. State Tribunals: These are Courts established by each State for the adjudication
   of matters constitutionally within the powers of every State government. State
   Courts include:

       i. State High Courts;

       ii. Magistrate Courts;

       iii. Customary/Area/Native/Sharia Courts;

       iv. Customary/Sharia Court of Appeal; and

       iv. Specialized tribunals set up by States for various purposes like rent,
               traffic, land disputes etc.

3. Election Petitions Tribunals: are specialized tribunals set up to adjudicate
       over disputes arising from elections into political offices in the executive and
       legislative arms of government at the Federal, State and Local Government
       levels. Usually, these courts are generally ad-hoc in nature as they are
       established to adjudicate over disputes arising from any election in the
       country to fill elective positions into the executive and legislative arms of
       government at the Federal, State and Local government levels. Members are
       usually serving judges pooled from various levels of the Judiciary, except
       the Supreme Court, depending on the level of the election being adjudicated
       over.

       Under the Nigerian legal complex, Superior Courts of records refer to all the
       courts presided over by judges trained in law where there is duty to record
       and publish for public access proceedings leading down to a judicial
       pronouncement.

                                                              46
       Inferior courts, on the other hand, may or may not have legal practitioners as
       presiding officers and are often not obliged to record all proceedings in any
       matter.

       Superior Courts of records include the Supreme Court, the Court of Appeal,
       the Federal High Court, State High Courts, National Industrial Court,
       Customary Courts of Appeal and Sharia Courts of Appeal. Inferior courts,
       tribunals and special courts include Magistrates` and District Courts,
       Juvenile Courts, Customary and Area Courts, Courts Martial and Public
       Complaints Commission.

The doctrine of separation of powers under the constitution

The separation of powers, often imprecisely and metonymically used
interchangeably with the trias politica principle, is a model for the governance of a
state or who controls the state. Under this model, the state is divided into branches,
each with separate and independent powers and areas of responsibility so that the
powers of one branch are not in conflict with the powers associated with the other
branches. The typical division is into three branches: a legislature, an executive,
and a judiciary, which is the trias politica model. It can be contrasted with the
fusion of powers in some parliamentary systems where the executive and
legislature (and sometimes parts of the judiciary are unified. Separation of powers,
therefore, refers to the division of responsibilities into distinct branches to limit any
one branch from exercising the core functions of another. The intent is to prevent
the concentration of power and provide for checks and balances.

Montesquieu's doctrine of separation of powers

The term tripartite system is ascribed to French Enlightenment political
philosopher Baron de Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws 1748, Montesquieu
described the separation of political power among a legislature, an executive, and a
judiciary. Montesquieu's approach was to present and defend a form of government
which was not excessively centralized in all its powers to a single monarch or
similar ruler. He based this model on the Constitution of the Roman Republic and
the British constitutional system. Montesquieu took the view that the Roman
Republic had powers separated so that no one could usurp complete power. In the

                                                              47
British constitutional system, Montesquieu discerned a separation of powers
among the monarch, Parliament, and the courts of law. Montesquieu did actually
specify that "the independence of the judiciary has to be real, and not apparent
merely. The judiciary was generally seen as the most important of powers,
independent and unchecked, and also was considered dangerous.

Checks and balances

To prevent one branch from becoming supreme, protect the opulent minority from
the majority, and to induce the branches to cooperate, government systems that
employ a separation of powers need a way to balance each of the branches.
Typically this was accomplished through a system of checks and balances, the
origin of which, like separation of powers itself, is specifically credited to
Montesquieu. Checks and balances allow for a system-based regulation that allows
one branch to limit another, such as the power of the United States Congress to
alter the composition and jurisdiction of the federal courts. Both bipartite and
tripartite governmental systems apply the principles of the separation of powers to
allow for the branches represented by the separate powers to hold each other
reciprocally responsible to the assertion of powers as apportioned by law. The
following example of the separation of powers and their mutual checks and
balances for the experience of the United States Constitution is presented as
illustrative of the general principles applied in similar forms of government as
well.

Legal practitioners in Nigeria are trained as barristers and solicitors within a
unified training scheme at the university level and thereafter at the Nigerian Law
School. They are then admitted to the Nigerian bar as solicitors and advocates of
the Supreme Court of Nigeria, thereby combining the duties of both callings and
making the legal profession in Nigeria to be under the overall control of the Bar
Council.

 The Practice of the Accusatorial System

The Nigerian legal process, especially at the level of recognized courts of records,
is accusatorial in nature. It is a feature that diminishes as one goes towards the
more informal tribunals, especially customary courts. However, in recent years, the
practice of a multi-door system that allows for the formal integration of alternative
dispute resolution processes and litigious ones is fast gaining acceptability.

The impact of law in the society

                                                              48
The impact of law examines the impact that law and social policy has on our lives,
both nationally and globally. How do law and society relate to, and change, each
other? How does law actually work in the real world? Is the law the same thing as
justice? You will explore a variety of fascinating issues while developing skills in
understanding, applying and critiquing socio-legal concepts and issues. With its
focus on the social dimensions of law, this major perfectly complements a wide
range of studies, including politics, communications, sociology, culture, economics
or anthropology.

In theory, the laws created within a society reflect the needs and values of that
society and will work for the best interests of the citizens, but laws can also
strongly influence the society that created them. The New York Times cites the
Brown v. Board of Education case of 1954 as proof that a law can change society,
saying that without the school integration reforms during the Civil Rights
Movement; schools would be very different today. Because desegregation laws
were put into place, people began to view discrimination differently. These
changes may have bolstered white supremacy advocates initially, but probably
paved the way for greater tolerance in the long run.

Similarly, the recent legislation regarding marriage equality legislation continues
to change the role and perception of homosexuality in society. Nevertheless,
studies by ProCon.org indicate that resistance to same-sex marriage has not
stopped, even in societies that legally endorse it. This shows how difficult it can be
to determine how exactly a law affects society, especially when the law is recent.

Globalisation challenges many of the traditional assumptions about International
law, its relationship to domestic law, the ways in which it is created and the
methods of its enforcement. The Law Department is engaged in cutting edge
research and study of the normative and institutional implications of this challenge
and of its theoretical and practical ramifications in a variety of fields ranging from
the regulation of trade and investments, the protection of human rights and the
international criminal responsibility of individuals, security and environmental
governance, and the safeguarding of the diversity of cultural heritage.

Human rights law has always had central role in the international law profile of the
EUI. In recent years and currently this involves areas such as cultural rights,
environmental rights, indigenous and minority rights, privacy and data protection,
human rights while countering terrorism, access to justice, international
mechanisms for the protection of human rights, and the interface between human

                                                              49
rights law and international humanitarian law, particularly in the context of the
changing nature of armed conflicts. Increasingly, issues of international criminal
law are integrated into the research conducted. The impact of new technologies
upon the enjoyment of human rights receives careful attention, including
biotechnologies and detection and surveillance technologies.

The legal reasoning and judicial process in Nigeria

Legal reasoning in judicial process has been defined by A.O Sanni as, the process
of careful thinking by a judicial officer in the course of resolving legal issues
presented by a party to a legal action before his court for determination. The
judicial process is a set of interrelated procedures and roles for deciding disputes
by an authoritative person or persons whose decisions are regularly obeyed. The
disputes are to be decided according to a previously agreed upon set of procedures
and in conformity with prescribed rules. As an incident, or consequence, of their
dispute-deciding function, those who decide make authoritative statements of how
the rules are to be applied, and these statements have a prospective generalized
impact on the behavior of many besides the immediate parties to the dispute.
Hence the judicial process is both a means of resolving disputes between
identifiable and specified persons and a process for making public policies.

For centuries hundreds of writers in thousands of articles and books have tried to
determine what is the essence of the judicial or adjudicatory process, what
distinguishes it from the legislative and administrative processes. During the last
several centuries this exercise in political taxonomy has taken on special urgency
and normative concerns. For under the doctrine of separation of powers it became
improper for legislatures to engage in the judicial process issuance of bills of
attainder, for example or for judges to assume functions that are thought to be
within the scope of the legislative process.

The classic doctrine of separation of powers divided the world of political activity
into the three familiar divisions based both on what was thought to be the behavior
of political actors and on what were thought to be the requirements for the
maintenance of liberty. The judiciary was assigned the function of applying the
laws that the constitution makers and the legislatures had created and that the
administrators enforced.

The Judiciary arm of government is responsible for interpreting the law of the land,
while applying it in situations where they are necessary; this makes the job of the
Judiciary a very critical one. The law of the land constitutes the bases upon which

                                                              50
judgments are ruled; it is therefore fundamental that its interpretation and
application be carried out with absolute alacrity and meticulousness. The Nigerian
Judicial System comprises of the Body of Benchers` and the Bar` itself. The
Body of Benchers is a collection of the highest ranking legal practitioners in the
country which is headed by the Chief Justice of the Federation. It also has as its
members the respective Chief Judges of the States of the Federation and certain
very reputable lawyers in the country, whereas the Bar is a body of all the
barristers in the country. These together constitute the Nigerian Legal Class. The
Nigerian Judicial System has come a long way, taking its origin from the colonial
era. It was saddled with the responsibility of checking the activities of the
Executive and Legislative arms of government. The Judiciary as a matter of fact,
plays a very vital role in the development of the country considering the fact it is
the mechanism that oversees to the usage and management of power in the
country. If the power that is vested on the Executive and Legislative offices is not
checked, the bulk of the citizenry will have lots of troubles and challenges to
contend with.

The primary responsibility of the Judiciary is to ensure that the Executive and
Legislative arms of government function within the ambits of the constitutional
provisions made available to them. The Judiciary ought to stand isolated while
performing its constitutional duty. It does not need any interference from the
Executive or Legislature in carrying out its primary assignment. It operates
independent of any external disturbances and functions with the constitutional
power vested in its office. The Nigerian Judicial System has had lots of challenges
to contend with. During the shambolic military era, the Judiciary was subjected to
abject emasculation to the extent that it lost the substance to its name and only
existed as a nomenclatural entity. To say the least, the Judiciary sank into
oblivion`. But with the advent of democracy came an organized political façade
that accorded the Judiciary its rightful place as the watchdog of the polity. The
importance of the Judiciary in any political system cannot be over-emphasized,
hence the constitution provides for its absolute independence to enable it perform
its sacred constitutional function without sentiments and reservations.

Personnel problems constitute by far the most daunting challenge facing the
judiciary and is the single most important problem threatening the sanctity of the
judiciary as the bastion of justice. The judiciary comprise of judicial officers who
are human beings and therefore subject to the vagaries of human nature in its
insidious form. While there are good, intellectually sound and upright judicial
officers of impeccable character and integrity in Nigeria, it is sad to say that a
sizeable percentage of judicial officers in Nigeria fall below the standard expected

                                                              51
of judicial officers in the area of intellectual capability, uprightness, character and
integrity and this reflects in the poor quality of judgments delivered by the various
courts in Nigeria and the growing problem of conflicting judgments and the
attendant confusion it brings in the legal system in Nigeria

The judicial system in Nigeria is beset with several deficiencies in its procedural
set up that make it very difficult to obtain justice and quick resolution of disputes
in courts. Most of the procedural rules of the various courts in Nigeria are in dire
need of reform and review to make it accord with the need to discard technicalities
and uphold substantive justice. A situation where many cases in Nigerian courts
take years to be resolved does not bode well for the judicial system and encourages
resort to self-help by disgruntled litigants.

4.0 SUMMARY

In theory, the laws created within a society reflect the needs and values of that
society and will work for the best interests of the citizens, but laws can also
strongly influence the society that created them. The New York Times cites the
Brown v. Board of Education case of 1954 as proof that a law can change society,
saying that without the school integration reforms during the Civil Rights
Movement, schools would be very different today. Because desegregation laws
were put into place, people began to view discrimination differently. These
changes may have bolstered white supremacy advocates initially, but probably
paved the way for greater tolerance in the long run. Similarly, the recent legislation
regarding marriage equality legislation continues to change the role and perception
of homosexuality in society. Nevertheless, studies by ProCon.org indicate that
resistance to same-sex marriage has not stopped, even in societies that legally
endorse it. This shows how difficult it can be to determine how exactly a law
affects society, especially when the law is recent.

The name Nigeria was coined by Lady Shaw Lugard, a journalist who later became
the wife of amalgamated Nigeria`s 1st Governor-General, Frederick Lugard. She
also wrote Nigeria`s 1st National Anthem.

 5.0 CONCLUSION

The Federal Republic of Nigeria is a Constitutional Republic. At independence,
Nigeria consisted of three regions, namely, the Northern Region, the Eastern
Region and the Western Region. Presently, Nigeria is made up of 36 states and a
federal capital territory, located in Abuja. These states are, as a matter of

                                                              52
convenience and political expediency grouped into 6 geopolitical zones of North
East, North West, North Central, South East, South West, and South South. This
grouping has however not been accorded any constitutional recognition. There are
close to 400 linguistic groups in Nigeria, but the 3 major languages are Hausa,
Igbo and Yoruba, while English is the official language. The Nigerian Legal
System is based on the English Common Law and legal tradition by virtue of
colonization and the attendant incidence of reception of English law through the
process of legal transplant. English law has a tremendous influence on the Nigerian
legal system, and it forms a substantial part of Nigerian law. Section 45 (1) of the
Interpretation Act provides that, the common law of England and the doctrines of
equity and the statutes of general application which were in force in England on
1st January, 1900 are applicable in Nigeria, only in so far as local jurisdiction and
circumstances shall permit. Consequently, legal issues evolving from common law
in England and codes of conduct of the medical profession and professional ethics
as a whole, such as confidentiality, consent, maleficence, beneficence, duty of care
are applicable in Nigeria even though they have not been legislated upon.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:

1. Baron De Montesquie was a renounced philosopher advocating against the
concentration of power on one person or agency. Discuss his doctrine of
separation of powers under the Nigerian constitution.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING

The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as amended

Border Communities Development Agency Act, 2003".

 Public Procurement Act"2003

Federal Capital Territory Internal Revenue Service Act, 2015.

The constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 as amended

Nigerian Legal system by Obilade

                                                              53
MODULE TWO: THE PURPOSE,FUNCTIONS AND CLSSIFICATION OF
LAW

UNIT 1: THE FUNCTIONS OF LAW IN THE SOCIETY

1.0 INTRODUCTION

According to Oxford English Dictionary, law is defined as the body of enacted or
customary rules recognized by a community as a binding. In short, law may be
defined as a body of rules which are enforced by the state. They are also enforced
by the police, supported by the court and prison systems. Laws are written by
legislators, such as senators or congressmen. In most countries, laws must preserve
and not contradict to the Constitution, a document outlining the most basic rules of
the country.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

At the end of the unit should be able to understand:

* The purpose of law in a society

*The functions of law

*Various classification of law

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

The purpose of law as well as what exactly deems something lawful does have its
contrasting reasoning's since each may vary depending on the region you reside
within. In general law serves five main functions: it cultivates and ensures the
existence of adequate order, provides resolutions to conflicts, provides a safe haven
for individuals and their assets, maintains the structured operation of the
civilization, and protects civil liberties as set forth in each nation's constitution.

There are six main functions of laws in a country. They are to keep the peace in a
country, shaping moral standards, promoting social justice, facilitating orderly

                                                              54
change, providing a basis for compromise and lastly to help in facilitating a plan.
Besides that there are two types of law. One is the written law which is the most
important source of law and which is enacted by certain bodies while the second
law is the unwritten law. It does not mean that the unwritten law is not written.
Basically it refers to those laws which are not enacted by the legislature and which
are not found in the written Federal and States Constitution.

The law serves many purposes and functions in society. Four principal purposes

and functions are establishing standards, maintaining order, resolving disputes, and

protecting        liberties         and      rights.

*The law is a guidepost for minimally acceptable behavior in society. Some

activities, for instance, are crimes because society through a legislative body has

determined that it will not tolerate certain behaviors that injure or damage persons

or their property. For example, under a typical state law, it is a crime to cause

physical injury to another person without justification--doing so generally

constitutes  the             crime       of  assault.

*This is an offshoot of establishing standards. Some semblance of order is
necessary in a civil society and is therefore reflected in the law. The law when
enforced provides order consistent with society`s guidelines.

*Disputes are unavoidable in a society made of persons with different needs,
wants, values, and views. The law provides a formal means for resolving disputes
the court system. There is a federal court system and each state has its own
separate court system. There are also various less formal means for resolving
disputes collectively called alternative dispute resolution.

*The constitutions and statutes of the Nigeria and its constituent states provide for
various liberties and rights. A purpose and function of the law is to protect these
various liberties and rights from violations or unreasonable intrusions by persons,
organizations, or government. For example, subject to certain exceptions, the first
Amendment to the Constitution prohibits the government from making a law that
prohibits the freedom of speech. Someone who believes that his free speech rights

                                                              55
have been prohibited by the government may pursue a remedy by bringing a case
in the courts.

*In reference to its maintenance of order, law must decide exactly what is lawful
and what is not. In this same way, the purpose of law remains to provide a basis for
which one may lead a lawful life, with the well being of others as a consequence of
such a function. Law is, therefore, existent to maintain the safety of lawful citizens
from those who are unlawful. In order to proceed as doing justice for all, it must
then be employed equally amongst all, and not just a select few. Law exists as a
rigid yet stable force by which people are to follow. It serves as a means to prevent
the arbitrary rule of lackluster leaders who may decide to take over whole nations.
The purpose of law is to maintain the order of the country despite changes in
leadership.
It helps to remind all those who may have assumed new power that what is and
isn't lawful remains the same despite their advent into the head of the ruling party.
Regulation of power is also what law takes into account as no one, not even the
president, possesses full reign over the country due to the existence and practice of
law. The purpose of law is to maintain individual freedoms, while still keeping in
mind what is moral and right.
In terms of the judicial system, the purpose of law is attached to the way in which
judges may rule over cases brought forward for their specific attention. Without the
presence of law, there could never be judgment over what is or is not lawful.
Therefore, judges would be left to decide based on frivolous beliefs that may have
no basis whatsoever. Law is in existence to further the progress of societies as
absence of it would only have whole nations revert back. Law functions to ensure
that its citizens have the opportunity to exercise the rights provided to them. It
seemingly regulates a lot of what we think and do, though some may not be as
obvious as others. It is assumed that, each act we partake in is accompanied by the
express consideration of a law or societal rule, and as so, we proceed accordingly.
You have probably realized that laws may serve more than one principal function
and there are obviously more principal functions than the four that we have
identified.

4.0 SUMMARY

The purpose of law as well as what exactly deems something lawful does have its
contrasting reasoning's since each may vary depending on the region you reside
within. In general law serves five main functions: it cultivates and ensures the

                                                              56
existence of adequate order, provides resolutions to conflicts, provides a safe haven
for individuals and their assets, maintains the structured operation of the
civilization, and protects civil liberties as set forth in each nation's constitution.

1. Regulates conduct- acts as a deterrent i.e. if you do x you face punishment
y.

2.Avoids or Settles disputes ­ Contract law sets out rules for making & enforcing
agreements.

 3.Set out rights and obligations- for example the Charter of Rights limits the
government`s authority over citizens.

4, Provides remedies- if your rights have been violated under the law, the law
provides a system of recourse.

5.Maintains Order & provides protection- prohibits certain acts & provides for an
authority-(police) to protect us.

6.Sets up the structure of government- The Constitution Act assigns power &
duties to the various levels of government.

7. Directs how to make laws- The Parliament.

5.0 CONCLUSION

The concept of the functions of law is of major importance. It is needed to explain
the nature of law, to explain disciplines associated with law, to correctly interpret
and apply law, to pinpoint the interaction of law with social norms and institutions,
to determine which general principles to which the law should conform or deviate,
and to explain the law within the context of normative philosophy. This chapter
aims to contribute to the elaboration of the comprehensive reasoned scheme of the
functions of the law. In it, the questions of the social functions of law are
distinguished from the question of classifying legal norms into distinct normative
types. The four primary functions of law ­ preventing undesirable behaviour and
securing desirable behaviour which is performed in criminal law and torts;
providing facilities for private arrangements between individuals, which is found in
private law, criminal, and tort law; provisions of services and the redistribution of

                                                              57
goods found in legal systems; and settling unregulated disputes found in courts and
tribunals are discussed in the chapter. It also tackles the secondary and indirect
functions of the law. The secondary functions of the law include the determination
of procedures for changing the law and the regulation of the operation of law-
applying organs. The chapter concludes with the discussion of H.L.A. Hart's
classification of law.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:
What are the functions of law in a contemporary society?

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING
The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria as amended
Border Communities Development Agency Act, 2003".
 Public Procurement Act"2003
Federal Capital Territory Internal Revenue Service Act, 2015.
The constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria, 1999 as amended
Nigerian Legal system by Obilade

UNIT 2: CLASSIFICATION OF LAW
1.0 INTRODUCTION
There are many ways to classify laws. We will discuss two of them. To classify
means to put types of law into distinct categories. The burdens of proof are also
different for civil law and criminal law. A burden of proof is a party`s duty to

                                                              58
prove a claim or defense to a certain standard. In a typical civil case, the burden of
proof that the plaintiff must satisfy is preponderance of the evidence. There are
other ways of expressing this standard, including more likely than not, by greater
than 50% weight, and by the greater weight of the evidence.If the plaintiff does not
satisfy its burden during trial, the fact-finder i.e., the judge or jury, depending on
the case will decide the case in favor of the defendant.

In a criminal case, the burden of proof that the prosecution must satisfy is beyond
a reasonable doubt. The defendant is presumed to be not guilty unless the
prosecution proves the defendant`s guilt to the reasonable doubt standard. While
this standard is impossible to quantify in mathematical terms unlike in civil law, it
does not require the absence of doubt in the minds of the judge or jury. But the
judge or jury should find the defendant guilty only if firmly persuaded of the
defendant`s guilt based on a fair and full consideration of the evidence presented;
there is no reasonable doubt if this is the case

2.0 OBJECTIVE

At the end of the unit you should be able to

    Know the different classification of law
    Able to distinquish the distiquish each and explain each of them.

    identify six different sets of criteria commonly used as criteria for
       classifying laws; and

    define, and explain in a general way, all the categories of law that you
       encounter in this Unit

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

There are many ways to classify laws. To classify means to put types of law into
distinct categories or buckets. Envision two buckets side by side. A law may be the
type that goes in the first bucket or the second. Let`s look at some classification
buckets. The law serves many roles in business and society. Where this is most
apparent is in its three classifications:

The following are the major classifications of law:

   1. Public and Private Law
   2. Civil Law and Criminal Law

                                                              59
   3. Substantive and Procedural Law
   4. Municipal and International Law
   5. Written and Unwritten Law
   6. Common Law and Equity

Public and Private Law: Public Law can be defined as that aspect of Law that
deals with the relationship between the state, its citizens, and other states. It is one
that governs the relationship between a higher party the state and a lower one, the
citizens. Examples of public law include Constitutional Law, Administrative Law,
Criminal Law, International Law and so on. Private law, on the other hand, is that
category of the law that concerns itself with the relationship amongst private
citizens. Examples include the Law of Torts, the Law of Contract, the Law of Trust
and so on.

Civil Law and Criminal Law: Civil law in this regard can be defined as the aspect
of Law that deals with the relationship between citizens and provides means for
remedies if the right of a citizen is breached. Examples of civil law include the
Law of Contract, the Law of Torts, Family Law etc.

Criminal Law, on the other hand, can be referred to as that aspect of Law that
regulates crime in the society. It punishes acts which are considered harmful to the
society at large. An example of criminal law is the Criminal Code Act which is
applicable in the Southern part of Nigeria.

When treating a criminal case, the standard of proof to be used is proof beyond
reasonable doubt; S.135 Evidence Act 2011. Also, the burden of proof does not
shift from the prosecution. What this means is that before a conviction can be
gotten, the state has to prove the commission of the crime to be beyond reasonable
doubt.

On the other hand, in civil cases, the standard of proof is on the balance of
probabilities; S.134 Evidence Act 2011. Also, the burden of proof shifts between
both parties when they need to establish their case. Judgement normally goes in
favour of the particular party that has been able to prove its case more successfully.

Substantive and Procedural Law: Substantive Law is the main body of the law
dealing with a particular area of law. For example, the substantive law in relation
to Criminal Law includes the Criminal Code Act and the Penal Code Act.

Procedural law, on the other hand, is law in that deals with the process which the
courts must follow in order to enforce the substantive law. Examples include the

                                                              60
rules of the various courts and the Administration of Criminal Justice Act 2015,
which is the procedural law in relation to the Criminal Code Act and the Penal
Code Act.

Municipal/Domestic and International Law: Municipal/Domestic law is the aspect
of law which emanates from and has effect on members of a specific state. An
example of a municipal Nigerian law is the Constitution of the Federal Republic
of Nigeria 1999(as amended) which applies in only Nigeria.

International law, on the other hand, is the law between countries. It regulates the
relationship between different independent countries and is usually in the form of
treaties, international customs etc. Examples of International law include the
Universal Declaration of Human Rights and the African Charter on Human
and People's Rights. It should be noted that according to the provision of S.12 of
the 1999 Constitution (as amended) International treaties cannot have the force of
law in Nigeria except they are enacted by the Nigerian National Assembly.

Written and Unwritten Law: A law would not be regarded as written just because
it is written down in a document. Written laws are those laws that have been
validly enacted by the legislature of a country.

Unwritten laws, on the other hand, are those laws that are not enacted by the
legislature. They include both customary and case law. Customary Law as part of
its basic characteristic is generally unwritten. Case law, though written down in a
documentary format, would be regarded as unwritten law based on the fact that it is
not enacted by the legislature. An example of this is the good neighbour principle
established in the case of Donoghue vs. Stevenson. The principle posits that
manufacturers of products should take utmost care in their manufacturing activities
to ensure that the consumption of their product doesn`t result in harm to the
consumer. This principle is not enacted in a statute but is a case law which is
applicable in Nigerian Courts.

Common Law and Equity: In the legal sense, the term common law means the law
developed by the old common law courts of the King`s Bench, the Courts of
Common Pleas and the Courts of Exchequer. The English common law is regarded
as such because it is law common to all parts of England. It grew over time from
the practices, customs and way of life of the people. It is largely unwritten. The
first common law judge was the King himself. People who had disputes usually
brought them to the King to settle them.

Overlap between civil law and criminal law.

                                                              61
You have likely recognized that there is overlap between civil law and criminal

law. That is, sometimes a wrongful act can be a violation of civil law and criminal

law. Let`s look an example. You may remember or have heard of the O. J.

Simpson cases from the 1990s as opposed to the 2008 case arising out of the

infamous Las Vegas hotel-casino room break-in incident. In October 1995, after a

lengthy criminal trial, a jury acquitted O. J. Simpson on two charges of murder for

causing the deaths of his ex-wife Nicole Brown Simpson and her friend Ronald

Goldman. In February 1997 after a civil trial, however, a different jury found O. J.

Simpson liable for wrongfully causing the deaths of Ronald Goldman and Nicole

Brown Simpson. Based on its findings of wrongful death, the jury awarded $8.5

million in compensatory damages and $25 million in punitive damages to the

victims`      families.

How is it possible for O. J. Simpson to be found not guilty in the criminal case, but
found liable in the civil case? The reason is because the burdens of proof are
different. Recall that the burden in a criminal case is beyond a reasonable doubt,
while the burden in a civil case is only preponderance of the evidence. Also, there
is no violation of double jeopardy under the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution,
because a civil case following a criminal case is not considered a second
prosecution for the same offense.

Common law and equity

Common law originated from England and has been inherited by almost every
country once tied to the British Empire except Malta, Scotland, the U.S. state of
Louisiana, and the Canadian province of Quebec. In medieval England, the
Norman conquest the law varied-shire-to-shire, based on disparate tribal customs.
The concept of a common law developed during the reign of Henry II during the
late 12th century, when Henry appointed judges that had authority to create an
institutionalized and unified system of law common to the country. The next major
step in the evolution of the common law came when King John was forced by his
barons to sign a document limiting his authority to pass laws. This great charter or
Magna Carta of 1215 also required that the King's entourage of judges hold their
courts and judgments at a certain place rather than dispensing autocratic justice in
unpredictable places about the country`

Equity is a body of rules that developed in England separately from the common
law. The common law was administered by judges and barristers . The Lord
Chancellor on the other hand, as the King's keeper of conscience, could overrule
the judge-made law if he thought it equitable to do so. This meant equity came to

          62
operate more through principles than rigid rules. For instance, whereas neither the
common law nor civil law systems allow people to split the ownership from the
control of one piece of property, equity allows this through an arrangement known
as a trust. Trustees control property, whereas the beneficial or equitable ownership
of trust property is held by people known as beneficiaries. Trustees owe duties to
their beneficiaries to take good care of the entrusted property. In the early case of
Keech v Sandford1722 a child had inherited the lease on a market in Romford,
London. Mr Sandford was entrusted to look after this property until the child
matured. But before then, the lease expired. The landlord had apparently told Mr
Sandford that he did not want the child to have the renewed lease. Yet the landlord
was happy apparently to give Mr Sandford the opportunity of the lease instead. Mr
Sandford took it. When the child now grew up, he sued Mr Sandford for the profit
that he had been making by getting the market's lease. Mr Sandford was meant to
be trusted, but he put himself in a position of conflict of interest. The Lord
Chancellor, Lord King, agreed and ordered Mr Sandford should disgorge his
profits. He wrote,

International law and domestic law

International law can refer to three things: public international law, private
international law or conflict of laws and the law of supranational organisations.

Public international law concerns relationships between sovereign nations. The
sources for public international law development are custom, practice and treaties
between sovereign nations, such as the Geneva Conventions. Public international
law can be formed by international organisations, such as the United Nations
(which was established after the failure of the League of Nations to prevent World
War II, the International Labour Organisation, the World Trade Organisation, or
the International Monetary Fund. Public international law has a special status as
law because there is no international police force, and courts e.g. the International
Court of Justice as the primary UN judicial organ lack the capacity to penalise
disobedience.[145] However, a few bodies, such as the WTO, have effective systems
of binding arbitration and dispute resolution backed up by trade sanctions.

Conflict of laws or private international law in civil law countries concerns which
jurisdiction a legal dispute between private parties should be heard in and which
jurisdiction's law should be applied. Today, businesses are increasingly capable of
shifting capital and labour supply chains across borders, as well as trading with
overseas businesses, making the question of which country has jurisdiction even

                                                              63
more pressing. Increasing numbers of businesses opt for commercial arbitration
under the New York Convention 1958.

Constitutional and administrative law

Constitutional and administrative law govern the affairs of the state. Constitutional
law concerns both the relationships between the executive, legislature and judiciary
and the human rights or civil liberties of individuals against the state. Most
jurisdictions, like the United States and France, have a single codified constitution
with a bill of rights. A few, like the United Kingdom, have no such document. A
constitution is simply those laws which constitute the body politic, from statute,
case law and convention.

The fundamental constitutional principle, inspired by John Locke, holds that the
individual can do anything except that which is forbidden by law, and the state
may do nothing except that which is authorised by law. Administrative law is the
chief method for people to hold state bodies to account. People can sue an agency,
local council, public service, or government ministry for judicial review of actions
or decisions, to ensure that they comply with the law, and that the government
entity observed required procedure. The first specialist administrative court was the
Conseil d'État set up in 1799, as Napoleon assumed power in France.

Administrative law is the body of law that governs the activities of administrative
agencies of government. Government agency action can include rulemaking,
adjudication, or the enforcement of a specific regulatory agenda. Administrative
law is considered a branch of public law. As a body of law, administrative law
deals with the decision-making of administrative units of government for example,
tribunals, boards or commissions) that are part of a national regulatory scheme in
such areas as police law, international trade, manufacturing, the environment,
taxation, broadcasting, immigration and transport. Administrative law expanded
greatly during the twentieth century, as legislative bodies worldwide created more
government agencies to regulate the social, economic and political spheres of
human interaction. Civil law countries often have specialized courts, administrative
courts, that review these decisions.

In common law countries

Generally speaking, most countries like Nigeria and other common law countries
that follow the principles of common law have developed procedures for judicial
review that limit the reviewability of decisions made by administrative law bodies.

                                                              64
Often these procedures are coupled with legislation or other common law doctrines
that establish standards for proper rulemaking. Administrative law may also apply
to review of decisions of so-called semi-public bodies, such as non-profit
corporations, disciplinary boards, and other decision-making bodies that affect the
legal rights of members of a particular group or entity.

While administrative decision-making bodies are often controlled by larger
governmental units, their decisions could be reviewed by a court of general
jurisdiction under some principle of judicial review based upon due process United
States or fundamental justice Canada. Judicial review of administrative decisions is
different from an administrative appeal. When sitting in review of a decision, the
Court will only look at the method in which the decision was arrived at, whereas in
an administrative appeal the correctness of the decision itself will be examined,
usually by a higher body in the agency. This difference is vital in appreciating
administrative law in common law countries.

The scope of judicial review may be limited to certain questions of fairness, or
whether the administrative action is ultra vires. In terms of ultra vires actions in the
broad sense, a reviewing court may set aside an administrative decision if it is
unreasonable under Canadian law, following the rejection of the Patently
Unreasonable standard by the Supreme Court in Dunsmuir v. New Brunswick,
Wednesbury unreasonable under British law, or arbitrary and capricious under U.S.
Administrative Procedure Act and New York State law. Administrative law, as laid
down by the Supreme Court of India, has also recognized two more grounds of
judicial review which were recognized but not applied by English Courts, namely
legitimate expectation and proportionality.

The powers to review administrative decisions are usually established by statute,
but were originally developed from the royal prerogative writs of English law, such
as the writ of mandamus and the writ of certiorari. In certain Common Law
jurisdictions, such as India or Pakistan, the power to pass such writs is a
Constitutionally guaranteed power. This power is seen as fundamental to the power
of judicial review and an aspect of the independent judiciary.

4.0 SUMMARY

Constitutional Law, Public law. Criminal Law, Public law, International Law,
Private law Private Contract Private Law Tort Trust.

                                                              65
Refers to the body of law based on custom and general principles and that
embodied in case law, serve as precedent or is applied to situations not covered by
status· Judges are not free to decide cases on the basis of fairness but only on the
basis of the application of the law can lead to an unfair or harsh result.· The
common law became rigid and unresponsive to the needs of certain situation.

 Equity· The name given Equity is the set of legal principles in countries
following the English common law tradition, which supplement strict rules of law
where their application would operate harshly, so as to achieve what is sometimes
referred to as natural justice· It also means fairness· Equity has been described
as a gloss [meaning a supplement] on the common law, filling in the graps and
making the English legal system more complete· In English Law, equity means
that body of rules originally enforced only by the court of chancery.

Govern the All law passed in relationships Malaysia are between the national law
citizens in a country Can be divided Known as into two part: municipal · Public
lawlaw/state law · Private law National Law

 International law Body of law which is composed of the principles and rules of
conduct which states feel themselves bound to observe May be subdivided into two
categories: Public International Law Private International Law Public international
law the law prevails between states and govern mutual relationships of states inter
se, particularly rules of war Examples: Dispute revolving ligitan islands in Sabah.
Private International Law Its rules are primarily concerned with determining what
systems of state law should properly be applied by our courts in cases which
contain some foreign` element Example: family matter

Crime is defined as Function of criminal an act of law is to punish the
disobedience of offender by way of the law forbidden imprisonment, fine under
pain of and/ or caning punishmentLaw that characterized The police are the public
certain kinds of servants whose duty is the wrongdoings against prevention and
detection of the state, not crime and prosecution of necessarily violating offenders
before the courts any right and Criminal of lawpunishable by the state Law

It includes law of contracts,Civil law of tort, law of property, law of succession
and familyLaw law Concerns with rights and duties of individuals towards each

                                                              66
other Function is to provide remedies to the aggrieved party, in the form of
damages, specific performance, injunction and quantum meruit

Public Law that governs there lationship between individuals and the state· Two
categories of the public law: · Constitutional law= lays down the rights of
individuals in the state. Regulates the functioning of organs of the central
governments · Criminal law= codifies the various offences committed by
individuals against the state.

Private LawConcerned with matters that affect the rights and duties of individuals
amongst themselves Also known as civil law The branches of law which govern
private obligationsLaw of contracts Law of torts Law of property

Written Law It is the most important source of law in Malaysia · Federal · Law
constitution enacted by · State parliament legislation or state assemblies ·
Legislation · Subsidiary legislation

Unwritten law is found in cases decided by the courts, local customs Law which is
not being enacted by the parliament or state assemblies and which is unwritten not
found in the written federal and state Law constitutions The unwritten law
comprises of the following: -Principles of English law applicable to the local
circumstances -Judicial decisions on Malaysian law -customs of the local
inhabitants, which have been accepted as law by the coutrs

 Procedural law· Lays down the rules governing the manner in which a right is
enforced under civil law, or a crime prosecuted under criminal law· Concerns with
the procedures & evidences in the enforcement or rights & duties· Procedural law
governs the steps in the progress of the civil legal action or criminal prosecution·
Example: the criminal procedure code and the civil procedure code

5.0 CONCLUSION

 We have looked at six different possibilities of frameworks to adopt as ways of
 classifying laws. Make sure you understand what these six organising
 frameworks are, and what general picture each framework gives to our
 understanding of 'the law. The questions that follow here can be used either as
 an aid to learning and revision, or as a self-test when you feel confident that you
 have understood and mastered the material. See if you can write down in your

                                                              67
 own words, more or less the six different frames of reference used in this Unit
 for setting up different classifications of laws.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

 Name the appropriate category of law to fit each of the following descriptions:
           a) law that regulates relationships between two or more different
               countries
               b) law that operates within a single country
               c) law, within a newly independent country, that derives from the
               legal system of its former colonial ruler
               d) law deriving from the body of custom that is traditional within a
               newly independent country

               e) law deriving from the English legal system and operating in a
               Commonwealth country.
REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS

Davis, Kenneth Culp (1975). Administrative Law and Government. St. Paul, MN:
West Publishing.

Yucel Ogurlu, Canan Kucukali, Focus on ICT in Turkish Judicial System,
http://www.coe.int/t/dghl/cooperation/cepej/series/Etudes7TIC_en.pdf, p.50.

 Administrative Sanctioning System in Turkey, www.idare.gen.tr/ogurlu-
administrative.htm

 Administrative law of Ukraine nowadays (the beginning of the 21st century):
monograph. Edited by Valentyn Galunko. ­ Kherson, 2010.

 New York v. Fed. Energy Regulatory Comm`n, 535 U.S. 1, 18 (2002

Unit 3: The Nigerian Legal system

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Law can be described as a system of rules a society sets to maintain order and
protect harm to persons and property. Law is a set of rules established by a

                                                              68
governing authority to institute and maintain orderly co-existence. The law
establishes restrictions and requirements for behaviour and represents a general
consensus of what is or is not ethical. Consequently, law acts as a guide for solving
research ethics problems. Laws are created through legislations which are called
statutory laws, or by judges in court cases which are called case laws. Statutory
laws comprises of written laws enacted by either a state legislature or national
assembly. Statutory laws are either civil or criminal. Case law comprises of
decisions of the various courts. These decisions determine the outcome of
individual court cases by providing precedents to be followed in the interpretation
of statutory laws and the Constitution.

The law of Nigeria consists of courts, offences, and various types of laws. Nigeria
has its own constitution which was established on 29th of May 1999. The
Constitution of Nigeria is the supreme law of the country. There are four distinct
legal systems in Nigeria, which include English law, Common law, Customary
law, and Sharia Islamic Law. English law in Nigeria is derived from the colonial
Nigeria, while common law is a development from its post colonial independence.
Customary law is derived from indigenous traditional norms and practices,
including the dispute resolution meetings of pre-colonial Yorubaland secret
societies and the Èkpè and Okónkò of Igboland and Ibibioland. Sharia Law also
known as Islamic Law is used only in Northern Nigeria, where Islam is the
predominant religion. The country has a judicial branch, the highest court of which
is the Supreme Court of Nigeria.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

The objective is to provide an overview of the various laws regulating human
activities in Nigeria with a view to compiling and codifying them.

Secondly, the module is aimed at increasing knowledge in respect of the laws
relating to management and conduct of ethics.

Thirdly, it will be a resource for stakeholders in research and development.

Lastly, it is hoped that it will strengthen research ethics evaluation capacities.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

The Federal Republic of Nigeria is a Constitutional Republic. At independence,
Nigeria consisted of three regions, namely, the Northern Region, the Eastern
Region and the Western Region. Presently, Nigeria is made up of 36 states and a

                                                              69
federal capital territory, located in Abuja. These states are, as a matter of
convenience and political expediency grouped into 6 geopolitical zones of North
East, North West, North Central, South East, South West, and South South. This
grouping has however not been accorded any constitutional recognition. There are
close to 400 linguistic groups in Nigeria, but the 3 major languages are Hausa,
Igbo and Yoruba, while English is the official language.

The Nigerian Legal System is based on the English Common Law and legal
tradition by virtue of colonization and the attendant incidence of reception of
English law through the process of legal transplant. English law has a tremendous
influence on the Nigerian legal system, and it forms a substantial part of Nigerian
law. Section 45 (1) of the Interpretation Act provides that, the common law of
England and the doctrines of equity and the statutes of general application which
were in force in England on 1st January, 1900 are applicable in Nigeria, only in so
far as local jurisdiction and circumstances shall permit. Consequently, legal issues
evolving from common law in England and codes of conduct of the medical
profession and professional ethics as a whole, such as confidentiality, consent,
maleficence, beneficence, duty of care are applicable in Nigeria even though they
have not been legislated upon.

The Nigerian Legal system covered branches and institutes of the system,
functions, classifications, sources, English law, doctrines of equity, statutes in
England and those extended to Nigeria, Nigerian legislation, judicial precedent,
hierarchy of Courts, customary law, application of State decisions in Customary
and Sharia Law, conflicts between English and Customary Law. Also covered are
applicable law between the different provenances, conflicts between Islamic and
Customary Law, types of Courts in Nigeria and their jurisdiction, and legal aid.
Essential documents are provided: Protocol to the African Charter on Human &
People's Rights of Women in Africa; Universal Declaration of Human Rights; and
African Charter on Human and People's Rights. A valuable explanation is given of
words and maxims used in the Nigerian legal system, and an index. Olong Adefi is
a barrister and solicitor of the Supreme Court of Nigeria; and lecturer at the
Faculty of Law at Kogi State University where he teaches administrative law,
commercial law, land law, legal research method, human rights and the Nigerian
legal system.

Common law system

A common law system is a legal system that gives great precedential weight to
common law, and to the style of reasoning inherited from the English legal system.

                                                              70
Common law systems originated during the Middle Ages in England, and from
there propagated to the colonies of the British Empire. Today, one third of the
world's population live in common law jurisdictions or in systems mixed with civil
law, including India, the United States (both the federal system and 49 of its 50
states), Pakistan, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Canada (both the federal system and all its
provinces except Quebec, Malaysia, Ghana, Australia, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong,
Singapore, Burma, Ireland, Israel, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Jamaica,
Trinidad and Tobago, Cyprus, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize,
Dominica, Grenada, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Nauru, Palau, South Africa,
Zimbabwe, Cameroon, Namibia, Liberia, Sierra Leone, Botswana, Guyana, and
Fiji. Many of these countries have interesting variants on common law systems,

Civil law, civilian law or Roman law is a legal system originating in Europe,
intellectualized within the framework of late Roman law, and whose most
prevalent feature is that its core principles are codified into a referable system
which serves as the primary source of law. This can be contrasted with common
law systems whose intellectual framework comes from judge-made decisional law
which gives precedential authority to prior court decisions on the principle that it is
unfair to treat similar facts differently on different occasions doctrine of judicial
precedent, or stare decisis. Historically, a civil law is the group of legal ideas and
systems ultimately derived from the Corpus Juris Civilis, but heavily overlaid by
Napoleonic, Germanic, canonical, feudal, and local practices, as well as doctrinal
strains such as natural law, codification, and legal positivism.

Conceptually, civil law proceeds from abstractions, formulates general principles,
and distinguishes substantive rules from procedural rules. It holds case law to be
secondary and subordinate to statutory law. When discussing civil law, one should
keep in mind the conceptual difference between a statute and a codal article. The
marked feature of civilian systems is that they use codes with brief text that tend to
avoid factually specific scenarios. Code articles deal in generalities and thus stand
at odds with statutory schemes which are often very long and very detailed.

Customary law

Custom in law is the established pattern of behavior that can be objectively verified
within a particular social setting. A claim can be carried out in defense of what has
always been done and accepted by law. Related is the idea of prescription; a right
enjoyed through long custom rather than positive law.

Customary law also, consuetudinary or unofficial law exists where:

                                                              71
   1. a certain legal practice is observed and
   2. the relevant actors consider it to be law opinio juris.

Most customary laws deal with standards of community that have been long-
established in a given locale. However the term can also apply to areas of
international law where certain standards have been nearly universal in their
acceptance as correct bases of action - in example, laws against piracy or slavery
(see hostis humani generis). In many, though not all instances, customary laws will
have supportive court rulings and case law that has evolved over time to give
additional weight to their rule as law and also to demonstrate the trajectory of
evolution (if any) in the interpretation of such law by relevant courts.

Islamic law

Islamic law represents one of the world's great legal systems. Like Judaic law,
which influenced western legal systems, Islamic law originated as an important
part of the religion. Sharia, an Arabic word meaning "the right path," refers to
traditional Islamic law. The Sharia comes from the Koran, the sacred book of
Islam, which Muslims consider the actual word of God. The Sharia also stems
from the Prophet Muhammad's teachings and interpretations of those teachings by
certain Muslim legal scholars. Muslims believe that Allah (God) revealed his true
will to Muhammad, who then passed on Allah's commands to humans in the
Koran.

Since the Sharia originated with Allah, Muslims consider it sacred. Between the
seventh century when Muhammad died and the 10th century, many Islamic legal
scholars attempted to interpret the Sharia and to adapt it to the expanding Muslim
Empire. The classic Sharia of the 10th century represented an important part of
Islam's golden age. From that time, the Sharia has continued to be reinterpreted and
adapted to changing circumstances and new issues. In the modern era, the
influences of Western colonialism generated efforts to codify it.

Islamic law is known as Shari`ah Law, which is derived from the Qur`an and
Hadith and applied to the public and private lives of Muslims within Islamic states.
Shari'ah law governs many aspects of day-to-day. The foremost source of
Shari'ah is the Qur`an, which records prohibitions on certain foods (pork, carrion,
wine, animals slaughtered in pagan ceremonies), a number of legal rules
concerning family law (marriage, divorce, and inheritance, criminal law the hudud
crimes, including penalties of highway robbery, illicit sexual activity, slander, and

                                                              72
wine-drinking, rules about witnesses, and commercial regulation including the ban
on riba usury and forms of contracts. Yet several difficulties result from depending
exclusively on the Qur`an: it simply does not speak to all (or even many) legal
issues.8

In addition, many of its statements are ambiguous and addressed to specific
historical situations. Ruthven comments, As for the specific injunctions about the
Muslims` struggles against and relationship with the non-Muslims, these varied
according to situations and were too specific to be termed laws` in the strict
sense.9 While Ruthven may want to limit the applicability of these specific
commands, throughout Islamic history many Muslims have read such commands
as normative throughout time, for example those passages regarding aggression
against non-Muslims. Modern Muslims, especially those educated in the West,
perceive the difficulty inherent in failing to acknowledge the historically specific
nature of such interactions and responses. ay life--politics, economics, banking,
business, contracts, social issues.

Socialist legal system

Socialist law or Soviet law denotes a general type of legal system which has been
used in communist and formerly communist states. It is based on the civil law
system, with major modifications and additions from Marxist-Leninist ideology.
There is controversy as to whether socialist law ever constituted a separate legal
system or not. If so, prior to the end of the Cold War, socialist law would be
ranked among the major legal systems of the world.

While civil law systems have traditionally put great pains in defining the notion of
private property, how it may be acquired, transferred, or lost, socialist law systems
provide for most property to be owned by the state or by agricultural co-operatives,
and having special courts and laws for state enterprises.

Many scholars argue that socialist law was not a separate legal classification.
Although the command economy approach of the communist states meant that
most types of property could not be owned, the Soviet Union always had a civil
code, courts that interpreted this civil code, and a civil law approach to legal
reasoning thus, both legal process and legal reasoning were largely analogous to
the French or German civil code system. Legal systems in all socialist states
preserved formal criteria of the Romano-Germanic civil law; for this reason, law
theorists in post-socialist states usually consider the Socialist law as a particular
case of the Romano-Germanic civil law. Cases of development of common law

                                                              73
into Socialist law are unknown because of incompatibility of basic principles of
these two systems common law presumes influential rule-making role of courts
while courts in socialist states play a dependent role.

4.0 SUMMARY

To a fresh law student hearing the word common law` would read ambiguous
meaning. It is only those that have been a little knowledgeable in the legal field
that would understand the meaning of the phrase common law. The pertinent
question then is how do we arrive at the legal meaning of common law. This
question and many others are what would be put to rest in this paper. This paper
would make us understand what a legal system is, five types of legal system would
be listed and two will be expatiated upon. procedures for the classification of laws,
matters or procedure relating to them. It can also be defined as a body of rules
including the principles, rules or doctrines associated with them that have the force
of law in a given society.

It should be noted that from a technical standpoint, there are as much legal systems
as there are sovereign independent countries. For example, Nigeria has its own
legal system which has been said to consist of each totality of laws or the legal
rules and machinery which operate within Nigeria as a sovereign and independent
African country. However, on a larger scale sovereign countries are grouped into
larger legal system classifications due to them sharing similar fundamental
characteristics.

The grouping of countries into legal system doesn`t necessarily mean that all their
laws are identical. These individual systems are grouped into larger classifications
because they share similar fundamental principles. For example, one similar
characteristic of common law legal system is the doctrine of judicial precedent.
Now that the concept of legal system has been expatiated. There are five legal
systems in the world today: Common law, Civil law, Customary law, Islamic
law and Socialist legal system.

5.0 CONCLUSION

The period of the historical development of common law can be traced to the
Norman conquest of the British isles in 1066 AD. Before the Norman conquest, the
indigenous British peoples had their indigenous customary laws. In 1154 Henry II
became king. He had the practice of sending Judges from his central court to hear

                                                              74
disputes throughout the realm. When these judges returned from their tour, they
would discuss the various customary laws they had encountered in their journeys.
The judges would then agree on which of these customs were more reasonable and
they would then be applied in subsequent disputes throughout the realm. This is
why the common law is usually described as having judge made laws. Judges
made law operated as the primary source of law until parliament acquired the
powers to make statutes. It should however be noted that most of these statutes are
in line with the fundamental tenets of the judge made laws. The common law legal
system was transferred by England to her colonies. This they did with the aid of
reception laws. One of the reception statutes in Nigeria is S.32 of the Interpretation
Act which provides that the rules of common law, doctrines of equity and statutes
of general application that were applicable before 1st January 1900 shall be
applicable in Nigeria. Countries that practise common law include: Nigeria, United
states of America, excluding Louisiana, Canada(excluding Quebec), India and
most other former British colonies.

Features of The Common Law Legal System

1. It operates the doctrine of judicial precedent. In the case of Global transport vs
free enterprises Nig ltd, judicial precedent was described as meaning that
decisions of courts of superior record are binding and the decisions of courts of
coordinate jurisdiction are for all intents and purposes binding between them.

2. The method of adjudication is adversarial in contrast to inquisitorial. This means
that judges are not expected to leave the bench and come into the field.

3. Unlike civil law, most of the laws in common law legal system are not codified.

4. Also, the jury system originated in common law. It is however not practised in
Nigeria.

5. Unlike the civil law its judges are not career judges. Before a person can be a
judge in a common law legal system he has to have been a practising lawyer for a
while. This can be seen in the provisions of S.250(3) CFRN 1999 provides that for
a person to be judge of the high court, he must have been a legal practitioner for
not less than 10 years.

6. In the common law, judges make law through their various decisions.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:

                                                              75
What do you understand the world legal system of a country and briefly discuss the
Nigerian legal system.

7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS
   Stuchka, P.I. (1988). Selected Writings on Soviet Law and Marxism. Robert

Sharlet, Peter B. Maggs, and Piers Beirne (eds.). Armonk, N.Y.: M.E. Sharpe.
ISBN 0-87332-473-0. OCLC 17353762.

    Evenson, Debra (2003). Law and Society in Contemporary Cuba (2nd ed.). The
Hague: Kluwer Law Internationa

UNIT 4: THE DOCTRINE OF SEPARATION OF POWERS
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Separation of Powers means that the three branches of government are separated.
The three branches are

    the Legislative- the part that makes laws
    the Executive - the part that carries out (executes) the laws, and
    the Judicial Branch - the courts that decide if the law has been broken.
Separation of Powers helps to make sure people are safe. The executive branch
carries out the laws but cannot make laws to make themselves powerful. Also the
judiciary is responsible for making sure that criminals are punished so that
members of the government or legislature cannot ignore the law as the judiciary
can check on them. Separation of powers is also called a system of checks and

                                                              76
balances because the branches can check up on each other and if any of the
branches get too strong, that branch will be balanced by the others.

In the United States the three branches of government are completely separate
except for the Vice President who is President of the Senate. In the United
Kingdom the three branches of Government are mixed but the checks and balances
are provided by history and custom the rule that says something should happen
because that is how it has been done for a long time. The Queen is Head of State
the executive, but is also part of Parliament the legislative branch and is the
Fountain of Justice the head of the judicial branch. But by convention she does not
do anything without the advice of Ministers and never refuses to pass an Act of
Parliament. The Queen has a lot of power but the power is controlled and balanced
by the need to act in certain ways or only use the power at certain times.

In some countries the leaders of the executive branch are members of the
legislature. This system is called responsible government. The first to talk about
separation of powers in the modern age was Charles-Louis Montesquieu.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

At the end of the unit you should be able to

    what is the doctrine pof separation of powers
    the organs of government that operates separation of powers
    the important of check and balances

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

The separation of powers, often imprecisely and metonymically used
interchangeably with the trias politica principle, is a model for the governance of a
state or who controls the state. Under this model, the state is divided into branches,
each with separate and independent powers and areas of responsibility so that the
powers of one branch are not in conflict with the powers associated with the other
branches. The typical division is into three branches: a legislature, an executive,
and a judiciary, which is the trias politica model. It can be contrasted with the
fusion of powers in some parliamentary systems where the executive and
legislature and sometimes parts of the judiciary are unified. Separation of powers,
therefore, refers to the division of responsibilities into distinct branches to limit any
one branch from exercising the core functions of another. The intent is to prevent
the concentration of power and provide for checks and balances.

                                                              77
Separation of powers is a political doctrine originating in the writings of Charles de
Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu in The Spirit of the Laws, in which he argued for
a constitutional government with three separate branches, each of which would
have defined abilities to check the powers of the others. This philosophy heavily
influenced the writing of the United States Constitution, according to which the
Legislative, Executive, and Judicial branches of the United States government are
kept distinct in order to prevent abuse of power. This United States form of
separation of powers is associated with a system of checks and balances.

During the Age of Enlightenment, philosophers such as Montesquieu advocated
the principle in their writings, whereas others, such as Thomas Hobbes, strongly
opposed it. Montesquieu was one of the foremost supporters of separating the
legislature, the executive, and the judiciary. His writings considerably influenced
the opinions of the framers of the United States Constitution.

Strict separation of powers did not operate in the United Kingdom, the political
structure of which served in most instances as a model for the government created
by the U.S. Constitution.Under the UK Westminster system, based on
parliamentary sovereignty and responsible government, Parliament consisting of
the Sovereign King-in-Parliament, House of Lords and House of Commons was
the supreme lawmaking authority. The executive branch acted in the name of the
King His Majesty's Government, as did the judiciary. The King's Ministers were in
most cases members of one of the two Houses of Parliament, and the Government
needed to sustain the support of a majority in the House of Commons. One
minister, the Lord Chancellor, was at the same time the sole judge in the Court of
Chancery and the presiding officer in the House of Lords. Therefore, it may be
seen that the three branches of British government often violated the strict
principle of separation of powers, even though there were many occasions when
the different branches of the government disagreed with each other.

Some U.S. states did not observe a strict separation of powers in the 18th century.
In New Jersey, the Governor also functioned as a member of the state's highest
court and as the presiding officer of one house of the New Jersey Legislature. The
President of Delaware was a member of the Court of Appeals; the presiding
officers of the two houses of the state legislature also served in the executive
department as Vice Presidents. In both Delaware and Pennsylvania, members of
the executive council served at the same time as judges. On the other hand, many
southern states explicitly required separation of powers. Maryland, Virginia, North
Carolina and Georgia all kept the branches of government separate and distinct.

                                                              78
Legislative power

Congress has the sole power to legislate for the United States. Under the
nondelegation doctrine, Congress may not delegate its lawmaking responsibilities
to any other agency. In this vein, the Supreme Court held in the 1998 case Clinton
v. City of New York that Congress could not delegate a line-item veto to the
President, by powers vested in the government by the Constitution.

Where Congress does not make great and sweeping delegations of its authority, the
Supreme Court has been less stringent. One of the earliest cases involving the
exact limits of non-delegation was Wayman v. Southard 23 U.S. (10 Wet.) 1, 42
1825. Congress had delegated to the courts the power to prescribe judicial
procedure; it was contended that Congress had thereby unconstitutionally clothed
the judiciary with legislative powers. While Chief JusticeJohn Marshall conceded
that the determination of rules of procedure was a legislative function, he
distinguished between important subjects and mere details. Marshall wrote that a
general provision may be made, and power given to those who are to act under
such general provisions, to fill up the details.

Marshall's words and future court decisions gave Congress much latitude in
delegating powers. It was not until the 1930s that the Supreme Court held a
delegation of authority unconstitutional. In a case involving the creation of the
National Recovery Administration called A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United
States, 295 U.S. 495 1935, Congress could not authorize the president to formulate
codes of fair competition. It was held that Congress must set some standards
governing the actions of executive officers. The Court, however, has deemed that
phrases such as just and reasonable, public interest and public convenience suffice.

Executive power

Executive power is vested, with exceptions and qualifications,in the President. By
law the president becomes the Commander in Chief of the Army and Navy, Militia
of several states when called into service, has power to make treaties and
appointments to office with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, receive
Ambassadors and Public Ministers, and take care that the laws be faithfully
executed Section 3. By using these words, the Constitution does not require the
president to personally enforce the law; rather, officers subordinate to the president
may perform such duties. The Constitution empowers the president to ensure the
faithful execution of the laws made by Congress and approved by the President.
Congress may itself terminate such appointments, by impeachment, and restrict the

                                                              79
president. Bodies such as the War Claims Commission, the Interstate Commerce
Commission and the Federal Trade Commissionall quasi-judicial often have direct
Congressional oversight.

Congress often writes legislation to restrain executive officials to the performance
of their duties, as laid out by the laws Congress passes. In INS v. Chadha 1983, the
Supreme Court decided (a) The prescription for legislative action requiring all
legislative powers to be vested in a Congress consisting of a Senate and a House of
Representatives and requiring every bill passed by the House and Senate, before
becoming law, to be presented to the president, and, if he disapproves, to be
repassed by two-thirds of the Senate and House represents the Framers' decision
that the legislative power of the Federal Government be exercised in accord with a
single, finely wrought and exhaustively considered procedure. This procedure is an
integral part of the constitutional design for the separation of powers. Further
rulings clarified the case; even both Houses acting together cannot override
Executive vetos without a 2/3 majority. Legislation may always prescribe
regulations governing executive officers.

Judicial power

Judicial powerthe power to decide cases and controversies is vested in the Supreme
Court and inferior courts established by Congress. The judges must be appointed
by the president with the advice and consent of the Senate, hold office during good
behavior and receive compensations that may not be diminished during their
continuance in office. If a court's judges do not have such attributes, the court may
not exercise the judicial power of the United States. Courts exercising the judicial
power are called constitutional courts.

Congress may establish legislative courts, which do not take the form of judicial
agencies or commissions, whose members do not have the same security of tenure
or compensation as the constitutional court judges. Legislative courts may not
exercise the judicial power of the United States. In Murray's Lessee v. Hoboken
Land & Improvement Co. 1856, the Supreme Court held that a legislative court
may not decide a suit at the common law, or in equity, or admiralty, as such a suit
is inherently judicial. Legislative courts may only adjudicate public rights
questions cases between the government and an individual and political
determinations.

To prevent one branch from becoming supreme, protect the opulent minority from
the majority, and to induce the branches to cooperate, government systems that

                                                              80
employ a separation of powers need a way to balance each of the branches.
Typically this was accomplished through a system of checks and balances, the
origin of which, like separation of powers itself, is specifically credited to
Montesquieu. Checks and balances allow for a system-based regulation that allows
one branch to limit another, such as the power of the United States Congress to
alter the composition and jurisdiction of the federal courts. Both bipartite and
tripartite governmental systems apply the principles of the separation of powers to
allow for the branches represented by the separate powers to hold each other
reciprocally responsible to the assertion of powers as apportioned by law. The
following example of the separation of powers and their mutual checks and
balances for the experience of the United States Constitution is presented as
illustrative of the general principles applied in similar forms of government as
well;

4.0 SUMMARY

The constitutional allocation of the legislative, executive, and judicial powers
among the three branches of government The doctrine under which the
legislative, executive, and judicial branches of government are not to infringe upon
each other's constitutionally vested powers Political doctrine of constitutional law
under which the three branches of government executive, legislative, and judicial
are kept separate to prevent abuse of power. Also known as the system of checks
and balances, each branch is given certain powers so as to check and balance the
other branches.

5.0 CONCLUSION

In the United States the three branches of government are completely separate
except for the Vice President who is President of the Senate. In the United
Kingdom the three branches of Government are mixed but the checks and balances
are provided by history and custom the rule that says something should happen
because that is how it has been done for a long time. The Queen is Head of State
the executive, but is also part of Parliament (the legislative branch and is the
Fountain of Justice the head of the judicial branch. But by convention she does not
do anything without the advice of Ministers and never refuses to pass an Act of
Parliament. The Queen has a lot of power but the power is controlled and balanced
by the need to act in certain ways or only use the power at certain times. In some
countries the leaders of the executive branch are members of the legislature. This
system is called responsible government.

                                                              81
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:
Discuss the doctrine of separation of powers by montesquie

REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS
This latter refers specifically to the separation of powers into three branches of
government: legislative, executive and judicial.
Quoted in Jan Weerda, Calvin, in Evangelisches Soziallexikon, Third Edition (1960),
Stuttgart (Germany), col. 210
Ward, Lee (2014). Modern Democracy and the Theological-Political Problem in
Spinoza, Rousseau, and Jefferson. Recovering Political Philosophy. Palgrave
Macmillan. pp. 25­26. ISBN 9781137475053. Retrieved 2015-11-03. Calvin's
republican sympathies derived from his view of human nature as deeply flawed.
Compound or mixed governments reflect the reality that human frailty justifies
and necessitates institutional checks and balances to the magistrate's presumed
propensity to abuse power. It was this commitment to checks and balances that
became the basis of Calvin's resistance theory, according to which inferior
magistrates have a duty to resist or restrain a tyrannical sovereign.
Clifton E. Olmstead (1960), History of Religion in the United States, Prentice-Hall,
Englewood Cliffs, N.J., pp. 9­10
Clifton E. Olmstead, History of Religion in the United States, pp. 69­76, 99­105,
114­16

                                                              82
Units 5: The Rule of law under the constitution

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Albert Venn Dicey was a British jurist and constitutional theorist. He is most
widely known as the author of Introduction to the Study of the Law of the
Constitution 1885. The principles it expounds are considered part of the uncodified
British constitution. He became Vinerian Professor of English Law at Oxford and a
leading constitutional scholar of his day. Dicey popularised the phrase rule of law,
although its use goes back to the 17th century.

Dicey was a Liberal Unionist and a vigorous opponent of Home Rule for Ireland
and published and spoke against it extensively from 1886 until shortly before his
death, advocating that no concessions be made to Irish nationalism in relation to
the government of any part of Ireland as an integral part of the United Kingdom.
He was thus bitterly disillusioned by the Anglo-Irish Treaty agreement in 1921 that
Southern Ireland should become a self-governing dominion the Irish Free State,
separate from the United Kingdom. Dicey was also vehemently opposed to
women's suffrage, proportional representation while acknowledging that the
existing first-past-the-post system wasn't perfect, and to the notion that citizens
have the right to ignore unjust laws. Dicey viewed the necessity of establishing a
stable legal system as more important than the potential injustice that would occur
from following unjust laws. In spite of this, he did concede that there were
circumstances in which it would be appropriate to resort to an armed rebellion but
stated that such occasions are extremely rare

2.0 OBJECTIVES:

                                                              83
At the end of the unit you should be able to

*understand the meaning of the rule of law

* the three elements of rule of law

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

The Rule of Law is one of the most fundamental aspects of modern legal systems.
Simply said, the rule says, howsoever high you may be; the Law is above you. It
specifies that the Law is supreme and that no human being is higher than the
authority of Law. Most constitutions, such as the English Constitution, the
American Constitution and India guarantee to follow the Rule of Law and hence
authorities are bound to follow it strictly. Administrative Law is largely based on
this Rule. The term Rule of Law was derived from the French phrase la principe de
legalite the principle of legality. The principles of Cole are developed by Dicey
and are written in his book Law and the Constitution 1885.

The rule of law is the legal principle that law should govern a nation, as opposed to
being governed by decisions of individualgovernment officials. It primarily refers
to the influence and authority of law within society, particularly as a constraint
upon behaviour, including behaviour of government officials. The phrase can be
traced back to 16th century Britain, and in the following century the Scottish
theologian Samuel Rutherford used the phrase in his argument against the divine
right of kings. John Locke defined freedom under the rule of law as follows:

       Freedom is constrained by laws in both the state of nature and political
       society. Freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of
       nature. Freedom of people under government is to be under no restraint apart
       from standing rules to live by that are common to everyone in the society
       and made by the lawmaking power established in it. Persons have a right or
       liberty to (1) follow their own will in all things that the law has not
       prohibited and (2) not be subject to the inconstant, uncertain, unknown, and
       arbitrary wills of others.

The rule of law was further popularized in the 19th century by British jurist A. V.
Dicey. The concept, if not the phrase, was familiar to ancient philosophers such as
Aristotle, who wrote Law should govern. Rule of law implies that every citizen is
subject to the law, including lawmakers themselves. In this sense, it stands in
contrast to an autocracy, dictatorship, or oligarchy where the rulers are held above
the law. Lack of the rule of law can be found in both democracies and

                                                              84
dictatorships, for example because of neglect or ignorance of the law, and the rule
of law is more apt to decay if a government has insufficient corrective mechanisms
for restoring it. Government based upon the rule of law is called nomocracy.

The Elements of the Rule of Law are:

The rule of law is the legal principle that law should govern a nation, as opposed to
being governed by decisions of individualgovernment officials. It primarily refers
to the influence and authority of law within society, particularly as a constraint
upon behaviour, including behaviour of government officials.The phrase can be
traced back to 16th century Britain, and in the following century the Scottish
theologian Samuel Rutherford used the phrase in his argument against the divine
right of kings. John Locke defined freedom under the rule of law as follows:

Freedom is constrained by laws in both the state of nature and political society.
Freedom of nature is to be under no other restraint but the law of nature. Freedom
of people under government is to be under no restraint apart from standing rules to
live by that are common to everyone in the society and made by the lawmaking
power established in it. Persons have a right or liberty to (1) follow their own will
in all things that the law has not prohibited and (2) not be subject to the inconstant,
uncertain, unknown, and arbitrary wills of others.

The rule of law was further popularized in the 19th century by British jurist A. V.
Dicey. The concept, if not the phrase, was familiar to ancient philosophers such as
Aristotle, who wrote Law should govern. Rule of law implies that every citizen is
subject to the law, including lawmakers themselves. In this sense, it stands in
contrast to an autocracy, dictatorship, or oligarchy where the rulers are held above
the law. Lack of the rule of law can be found in both democracies and
dictatorships, for example because of neglect or ignorance of the law, and the rule
of law is more apt to decay if a government has insufficient corrective mechanisms
for restoring it. Government based upon the rule of law is called nomocracy

1.Supremacy of Law

    'Supremacy of Law' is the central and most characteristic feature of
       Common Law.

    Law is the absolute supreme and predominant as opposed to influence of
       arbitrary power or discretionary power..

                                                              85
2.Equality before Law

    There must be equality before law or equal subjection of all classes to the
       ordinary law.

    All people should be subject to one and the same law..

3. Predominance of of Legal spirit

    Rights such as right to personal liberty, freedom from arrest etc.) are the
       result of judicial decisions in England.

    The rights are a result of court judgements rather than from being enshrined
       in the Constitution...

Modern Concept of Rule of Law

    Today, 'Rule of Law' is seen more as a concept of rights of citizens.
    Accepted in almost all countries outside the Communist.

5.0 SUMMARY

Rule of law *The expression 'Rule of Law' has been derived from the French
phrase 'la principle de legalite', i.e. a Government based on the principles of law.
*It was expounded for the first time by Sri Edward Coke, and was developed by
Prof. A.V.Dicey in his book 'The law of the Constitution' published in 1885

Rule of law According to Edward Coke , Rule of Law means: A.Absence of
arbitrary power on the part of the Government B.No man is punishable or can be
made to suffer in body or good except for a distinct breach of law established in
the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary courts of the land.

Rule of law As per Prof. A.V.Dicey, the rule of law means the absolute
supremacy or predominance of the regular law as opposed to the influence of
arbitrary power and excludes the existence of arbitrariness or even of wide
discretionary authority on the part of the government. The Law of the Constitution

Rule of law Dicey regarded rule of law as the bedrock of the British Legal
System: this doctrine is accepted in the constitutions of U.S.A. and India.

                                                              86
Rule of law According to Prof. Diccy, rules of law contains three principles or it
has three meanings as stated below:

1. Supremacy of Law : The First meaning of the Rule of Law is that 'no man is
punishable or can lawfully be made to suffer in body or goods except for a distinct
breach of law established in the ordinary legal manner before the ordinary courts of
the land

2. Equality before Law : the Second meaning of the Rule of Law is no man is
above law

3. Predominance of Legal Spirit or the Third meaning of the Rule of Law is the
general principles of the constitution are the result of juridical decisions
determining file rights of private persons in particular cases brought before the
Court.

5.0 CONCLUSION

In his early career, Dicey was in favor of the liberalism of John Stuart Mill, and
was rather influenced by his work. However, already by the 1880s he started to
drift apart from liberal thinking, and warned against its dangers. In his first major
work, the seminal An Introduction to the Study of the Law of the Constitution 1885,
Dicey warned that political freedom was under attack by modern incursions against
the Rule of Law. He believed that the freedom British subjects enjoyed was
dependent on two pillars: the sovereignty of Parliament and the supremacy of
common law through the means of the courts' freedom from governmental
interference. Dicey believed that in a society organized in that way, political
freedom could be preserved and democratic society could function harmoniously.

The Rule of Law ensures that leaders, who were elected by the people and whom
were given the power and authority by the people, always act in the best interest of
those people. Dicey, however, warned that the law must be followed by all, as
people in power often thought that they were above the law. Dicey argued that
the inner tendency of all people in power is to satisfy their personal needs out of
public resources. He thus insisted that no person is above the law and it is law that
rules all. He said: Every official, from the Prime Minister down to a constable or a
collector of taxes, is under the same responsibility for every act done without legal
justification as any other citizen. The Reports abound with cases in which officials
have been brought before the courts, and made, in their personal capacity, liable to

                                                              87
punishment, or to the payment of damages, for acts done in their official character
but in excess of their lawful authority. [Appointed government officials and
politicians, alike]...and all subordinates, though carrying out the commands of
their official superiors, are as responsible for any act which the law does not
authorise as is any private and unofficial person Dicey 1885 2006).
6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:
Discuss Dicey`s principles of the rule of law which has been enshrined in most
constitution of the world.

7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS
This latter refers specifically to the separation of powers into three branches of
government: legislative, executive and judicial.
Quoted in Jan Weerda, Calvin, in Evangelisches Soziallexikon, Third Edition (1960),
Stuttgart (Germany), col. 210
Ward, Lee (2014). Modern Democracy and the Theological-Political Problem in
Spinoza, Rousseau, and Jefferson. Recovering Political Philosophy. Palgrave
Macmillan. pp. 25­26.

MODULE THREE: MULTIPLE LEGAL SYSTEMS
UNIT 1: CUSTOMARY LAW

                                                              88
1.0 INTRODUCTION

Legal pluralism is the existence of multiple legal systems within one human
population and/or geographic area. Plural legal systems are particularly prevalent
in former colonies, where the law of a former colonial authority may exist
alongside more traditional legal systems cf.customary law. When these systems
developed, the idea was that certain issues e.g., commercial transactions) would be
covered by colonial law, while other issues e.g., family and marriage would be
covered by traditional law. Over time, these distinctions tended to break down and
individuals would choose to bring their legal claims under the system that they
thought would offer them the best advantage.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

The objective of this unit is that at the end of the unit :

* You should be able to understand the meaning and nature of customary law

* The characteristics of customary law

* Understand the meaning of custom

* That custom must pass through test before recognized in Nigerian courts

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Customary law is the established pattern of behavior that can be objectively
verified within a particular social setting. A claim can be carried out in defense of
"what has always been done and accepted by law. Related is the idea of
prescription; a right enjoyed through long custom rather than positive law.

Customary law also unofficial law exists where:

1. a certain legal practice is observed and
2. the relevant actors consider it to be law

Most customary laws deal with standards of community that have been long-
established in a given locale. However the term can also apply to areas of
international law where certain standards have been nearly universal in their
acceptance as correct bases of action - in example, laws against piracy or
slaveryhostis humani generis. In many, though not all instances, customary laws

                                                              89
will have supportive court rulings and case law that has evolved over time to give
additional weight to their rule as law and also to demonstrate the trajectory of
evolution if any in the interpretation of such law by relevant courts.

Nature of customary law

A central issue regarding the recognition of custom is determining the appropriate
methodology to know what practices and norms actually constitutes customary
law. It is not immediately clear that classic Western theories of jurisprudence can
be reconciled in any useful way with conceptual analyses of customary law, and
thus some scholars like John Comaroff and Simon Roberts)[2] have characterised
customary law norms in their own terms.

Customary international law are those aspects of international law that study the
principle of custom. Along with general principles of law and treaties, custom is
considered by the International Court of Justice, jurists, the United Nations, and its
member states to be among the primary sources of international law.The vast
majority of the world's governments accept in principle the existence of customary
international law, although there are many differing opinions as to what rules are
contained in it.

In international law, customary law refers to the Law of Nations or the legal norms
that have developed through the customary exchanges between states over time,
whether based on diplomacy or aggression. Essentially, legal obligations are
believed to arise between states to carry out their affairs consistently with past
accepted conduct. These customs can also change based on the acceptance or
rejection by states of particular acts. Some principles of customary law have
achieved the force of peremptory norms, which cannot be violated or altered
except by a norm of comparable strength. These norms are said to gain their
strength from universal acceptance, such as the prohibitions against genocide and
slavery. Customary international law can be distinguished from treaty law, which
consists of explicit agreements between nations to assume obligations. However,
many treaties are attempts to codify pre-existing customary law.

Customary law is recognized, not because it is backed by the power of some strong
individual or institution, but because each individual recognizes the benefits of
behaving in accordance with other individuals' expectations, given that others also
behave as he expects. Alternatively, if a minority coercively imposes law from
above, then that law will require much more force to maintain social order than is

                                                              90
required when law develops from the bottom through mutual recognition and
acceptance.

Reciprocities are the basic source both of the recognition of duty to obey law and
of law enforcement in a customary law system. That is, individuals must exchange
recognition of certain behavioral rules for their mutual benefit. Fuller suggested
three conditions that make a duty clear and acceptable to those affected:

Under customary law, offenses are treated as torts private wrongs or injuries rather
than crimes offenses against the state or the society. A potential action by one
person has to affect someone else before any question of legality can arise; any
action that does not, such as what a person does alone or in voluntary cooperation
with someone else but in a manner that clearly harms no one, is not likely to
become the subject of a rule of conduct under customary law. Fuller proposed that
customary law might best be described as a language of interaction. Facilitating
interaction can only be accomplished with recognition of clear although not
necessarily written codes of conduct enforced through reciprocally acceptable, well
established adjudication arrangements accompanied by effective legal sanctions.

A judgment under customary law is typically enforceable because of an effective
threat of total ostracism by the community e.g., the primitive tribe, the merchant
community. Reciprocities between the groups, recognizing the high cost of refusal
to accept good judgments, takes those who refuse such a judgment outside their
support group and they become outcasts or outlaws. The adjudicated solutions tend
to be accepted due to fear of this severe boycott sanction.

In international law, customary law refers to the Law of Nations or the legal norms
that have developed through the customary exchanges between states over time,
whether based on diplomacy or aggression. Essentially, legal obligations are
believed to arise between states to carry out their affairs consistently with past
accepted conduct. These customs can also change based on the acceptance or
rejection by states of particular acts. Some principles of customary law have
achieved the force of peremptory norms, which cannot be violated or altered
except by a norm of comparable strength. These norms are said to gain their
strength from universal acceptance, such as the prohibitions against genocide and
slavery. Customary international law can be distinguished from treaty law, which
consists of explicit agreements between nations to assume obligations. However,
many treaties are attempts to codify pre-existing customary law.

4.0 SUMMARY

                                                              91
A central issue regarding the recognition of custom is determining the appropriate
methodology to know what practices and norms actually constitutes customary
law. It is not immediately clear that classic Western theories of jurisprudence can
be reconciled in any useful way with conceptual analyses of customary law, and
thus some scholars (like John Comaroff and Simon Roberts)[2] have characterised
customary law norms in their own terms. Yet, there clearly remains some
disagreement, which is seen in John Hund's critique of Comaroff and Roberts'
theory, and preference for the contributions of H. L. A. Hart. Hund argues that
Hart's. The Concept of Law solves the conceptual problem with which scholars
who have attempted to articulate how customary law principles may be identified,
defined and how they operate in regulating social behaviour.

The modern codification of civil law developed from the tradition of medieval
custumals, collections of local customary law that developed in a specific manorial
or borough jurisdiction, and which were slowly pieced together mainly from case
law and later written down by local jurists. Custumals acquired the force of law
when they became the undisputed rule by which certain rights, entitlements, and
obligations were regulated between members of a community. Some examples
include Bracton's De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae for England, the
Coutume de Paris for the city of Paris, the Sachsenspiegel for northern Germany,
and the many fueros of Spain.nd resolving disputes.

5.0 CONCLUSION

Customary law is a recognized source of law within jurisdictions of the civil law
tradition, where it may be subordinate to both statutes and regulations. In
addressing custom as a source of law within the civil law tradition, John Henry
Merryman notes that, though the attention it is given in scholarly works is great, its
importance is "slight and decreasing."[12] On the other hand, in many countries
around the world, one or more types of customary law continue to exist side by
side with official law, a condition referred to as legal pluralism..

In the canon law of the Catholic Church, custom is a source of law. Canonical
jurisprudence, however, differs from Civil law jurisprudence in requiring the
express or implied consent of the legislator for a custom to obtain the force of law.
In the Common Law of England, "Long usage" must be established. It is a broad
principle of property law that, if something has gone on for a long time without
objection, whether it be using a right of way or occupying land to which one has no

                                                              92
title, the law will eventually recognise the fact and give the person doing it the
legal right to continue.

It is known in case law as Customary Rights Customary rights. Something which
has been practised since time immemorial by reference to a particular locality may
acquire the legal status of a custom, which is a form of local law.The legal criteria
defining a custom are precise. The most common claim in recent times, is for
customary rights to moor a vessel. The mooring must have been in continuous use
for "Time Immemorial" which is defined by legal precedent as 12 years or 20 years
for Crown Land) for the same purpose by people using them for that purpose.

To give two examples ;-A custom of mooring which might have been established
in past times for over two hundred years by the fishing fleet of local inhabitants of
a coastal community will not simply transfer so as to benefit present day
recreational boat owners who may hail from much further afield.

6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Explain the concept of customary law at both local and international levels and
what does it entails in contemporary world.

7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READINGS

   Slattery, Brian. Generic and Specific Aboriginal Rights (PDF). p. 6. Retrieved
21 August 2008. and Foster, Hamar; Heather Raven and Jeremy Webber (eds.)
(2007). Let Right Be Done: Aboriginal title, the Calder Case, and the Future of
Indigenous Rights. 18 No. 7 (July, 2008). Vancouver: UBC Press. pp. 574­578.
Retrieved 11 September 2010.

   "JuryGlobe". University of Ottawa. Retrieved 11 September 2010.

   Dolores A. Donovan and Getachew Assefa, "Homicide in Ethiopia: Human
Rights, Federalism, and Legal Pluralism," American Journal of Comparative Law,
51 (2003), p. 505

                                                              93
   Judith Beyer, Kyrgyz Aksakal Courts: Pluralistic Accounts of History, 53 J. OF
L. PLURALISM 144 (2006)

   Former President Akaev, quoted in Beyer, Kyrgyz Aksakal Courts
   Spencer Heath MacCallum (12 September 2007). "The Rule of Law without the
State". Ludwig von Mises Institute. Retrieved 11 September 2010.
   "Grassroots Conflict Assessment Of the Somali Region, Ethiopia" (PDF). CHF
International. August 2006. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 July 2011.
Retrieved 11 September 2010.
   "Better off stateless" (PDF). Retrieved 11 September 2010.
   Van Notten, Michael. 2005. The Law of the Somalis: A Stable Foundation for

                                                              94
UNIT 2 CRIMINAL LAW AND PROCEDURE

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Have you ever watched the television show Law and Order? In the popular show,
the first portion relates to a crime that was committed. This part of the show
focuses on the police and detective work involved in trying to solve the crime and
gather evidence to prove their case against the perpetrator of the crime. The second
part of the show pertains to the legal system and shows how criminal law applies to
the facts. Thus, you will see criminal law in action as it plays out in the courtroom.
This program offers a very good insight into the body of criminal law.

2.0 OBJECTIVES:

At the end of the unit you should be able to:

*the meaning of crime

*the elements of crims

*what constitute crime and the general defences of a crime

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Criminal law is the body of law that relates to crime. It proscribes conduct
perceived as threatening, harmful, or otherwise endangering to the property, health,
safety, and moral welfare of people. Most criminal law is established by statute,
which is to say that the laws are enacted by a legislature. It includes the
punishment of people who violate these laws. Criminal law varies according to
jurisdiction, and differs from civil law, where emphasis is more on dispute
resolution and victim compensation than on punishment. Criminal law also refers
to a body of laws that apply to criminal acts. In instances where an individual fails
to adhere to a particular criminal statute, he or she commits a criminal act by
breaking the law. This body of laws is different from civil law, because criminal
law penalties involve the forfeiture of one's rights and imprisonment. Conversely,

                                                              95
civil laws relate to the resolution of legal controversies and involve money
damages.

There are various theories for why we have a criminal law system. Neither theory
is exclusive or dispositive. The main theories for criminal law include: to deter
crime, to reform the perpetrator, to provide retribution for the act, and to prevent
further crimes. There is much discussion regarding these theories of criminal law
and which policy is best promoted by the body of criminal law.

Criminal law is distinctive for the uniquely serious potential consequences or
sanctions for failure to abide by its rules. Every crime is composed of criminal
elements. Capital punishment may be imposed in some jurisdictions for the most
serious crimes. Physical or corporal punishment may be imposed such as whipping
or caning, although these punishments are prohibited in much of the world.
Individuals may be incarcerated in prison or jail in a variety of conditions
depending on the jurisdiction. Confinement may be solitary. Length of
incarceration may vary from a day to life. Government supervision may be
imposed, including house arrest, and convicts may be required to conform to
particularized guidelines as part of a parole or probation regimen. Fines also may
be imposed, seizing money or property from a person convicted of a crime.

Five theories are widely accepted for enforcement of the criminal law by
punishments: retribution, deterrence, incapacitation, rehabilitation and restoration.
Jurisdictions differ on the value to be placed on each.

Retribution ­ Criminals ought to Be Punished in some way. This is the most
widely seen goal. Criminals have taken improper advantage, or inflicted unfair
detriment, upon others and consequently, the criminal law will put criminals at
some unpleasant disadvantage to "balance the scales." People submit to the law to
receive the right not to be murdered and if people contravene these laws, they
surrender the rights granted to them by the law. Thus, one who murders may be
executed himself. A related theory includes the idea of "righting the balance."

Deterrence ­ Individual deterrence is aimed toward the specific offender. The aim
is to impose a sufficient penalty to discourage the offender from criminal behavior.
General deterrence aims at society at large. By imposing a penalty on those who
commit offenses, other individuals are discouraged from committing those
offenses.

                                                              96
Incapacitation ­ Designed simply to keep criminals away from society so that the
public is protected from their misconduct. This is often achieved through prison
sentences today. The death penalty or banishment have served the same purpose.

Rehabilitation ­ Aims at transforming an offender into a valuable member of
society. Its primary goal is to prevent further offense by convincing the offender
that their conduct was wrong.

Restoration ­ This is a victim-oriented theory of punishment. The goal is to repair,
through state authority, any injury inflicted upon the victim by the offender. For
example, one who embezzles will be required to repay the amount improperly
acquired. Restoration is commonly combined with other main goals of criminal
justice and is closely related to concepts in the civil law, i.e., returning the victim
to his or her original position before the injury.

Types of Criminal Laws

There are two types of criminal laws: misdemeanors and felonies. A misdemeanor
is an offense that is considered a lower level criminal offense, such as minor
assaults, traffic offenses, or petty thefts. Moreover, in most states, the penalty for
the misdemeanor crime is typically one year or less.

In contrast, felony crimes involve more serious offenses. Some examples of
felonies include murder, manslaughter, dealing drugs, rape, robbery, and arson. In
virtually every state in the U.S., felonies carry a penalty of one year or more,
depending upon the particular nature of the offense and the jurisdiction where the
felony crime was committed. In addition, every state has a different body of
criminal laws which vary from state to state. There are also federal criminal law
statutes which apply to every state

3.5 The Elements of criminal law

The criminal law generally prohibits undesirable acts. Thus, proof of a crime
requires proof of some act. Scholars label this the requirement of an actus reus or
guilty act. Some crimes particularly modern regulatory offenses ­ require no
more, and they are known as strict liability offenses . Under the Road traffic Act
1988 it is a strict liability offence to drive a vehicle with an alcohol concentration
above the prescribed limit. Nevertheless, because of the potentially severe
consequences of criminal conviction, judges at common law also sought proof of

                                                              97
an intent to do some bad thing, the mens rea or guilty mind. As to crimes of which
both actus reus and mens rea are requirements, judges have concluded that the
elements must be present at precisely the same moment and it is not enough that
they occurred sequentially at different times.[8]

Actus reus

Actus reus is Latin word for guilty act and is the physical element of committing a
crime. It may be accomplished by an action, by threat of action, or exceptionally,
by an omission to act, which is a legal duty to act. For example, the act of A
striking B might suffice, or a parent's failure to give food to a young child also may
provide the actus reus for a crime.

Where the actus reus is a failure to act, there must be a duty of care. A duty can
arise through contract, a voluntary undertaking, a blood relation with whom one
lives, and occasionally through one's official position. Duty also can arise from
one's own creation of a dangerous situation. On the other hand, it was held in the
U.K. that switching off the life support of someone in a persistent vegetative state
is an omission to act and not criminal. Since discontinuation of power is not a
voluntary act, not grossly negligent, and is in the patient's best interests, no crime
takes place.

An actus reus may be nullified by an absence of causation. For example, a crime
involves harm to a person, the person's action must be the but for cause and
proximate cause of the harm. If more than one cause exists . harm comes at the
hands of more than one culprit the act must have more than a slight or trifling link
to the harm. Causation is not broken simply because a victim is particularly
vulnerable. This is known as the thin skull rule. However, it may be broken by an
intervening act novus actus interveniens of a third party, the victim's own conduct,
or another unpredictable event. A mistake in medical treatment typically will not
sever the chain, unless the mistakes are in themselves "so potent in causing death.

Mens rea

Mens rea is another Latin phrase, meaning guilty mind. This is the mental element
of the crime. A guilty mind means an intention to commit some wrongful act.
Intention under criminal law is separate from a person's motivealthough motive
does not exist in Scots law. A lower threshold of mens rea is satisfied when a
defendant recognizes an act is dangerous but decides to commit it anyway. This is
recklessness. It is the mental state of mind of the person at the time the actus reus

                                                              98
was committed. For instance, if C tears a gas meter from a wall to get the money
inside, and knows this will let flammable gas escape into a neighbour's house, he
could be liable for poisoning. Courts often consider whether the actor did
recognize the danger, or alternatively ought to have recognized a risk. Of course, a
requirement only that one ought to have recognized a danger though he did not is
tantamount to erasing intent as a requirement. In this way, the importance of mens
rea has been reduced in some areas of the criminal law but is obviously still an
important part in the criminal system.

Wrongfulness of intent also may vary the seriousness of an offense and possibly
reduce the punishment but this is not always the case. A killing committed with
specific intent to kill or with conscious recognition that death or serious bodily
harm will result, would be murder, whereas a killing affected by reckless acts
lacking such a consciousness could be manslaughter. On the other hand, it matters
not who is actually harmed through a defendant's actions. The doctrine of
transferred malice means, for instance, that if a man intends to strike a person with
his belt, but the belt bounces off and hits another, mens rea is transferred from the
intended target to the person who actually was struck. Note: The notion of
transferred intent does not exist within Scots' Law. In Scotland, one would not be
charged with assault due to transferred intent, but instead assault due to
recklessness.

Strict liability

Strict liability can be described as criminal or civil liability notwithstanding the
lack mens rea or intent by the defendant. Not all crimes require specific intent, and
the threshold of culpability required may be reduced or demoted. For example, it
might be sufficient to show that a defendant acted negligently, rather than
intentionally or recklessly. In offenses of absolute liability, other than the
prohibited act, it may not be necessary to show the act was intentional. Generally,
crimes must include an intentional act, and intent is an element that must be proved
in order to find a crime occurred. The idea of a strict liability crime is an
oxymoron. The few exceptions are not truly crimes at all but are administrative
regulations and civil penalties created by statute, such as crimes against the traffic
or highway code.

Fatal offenses

A murder, defined broadly, is an unlawful killing. Unlawful killing is probably the
act most frequently targeted by the criminal law. In many jurisdictions, the crime

                                                              99
of murder is divided into various gradations of severity, e.g., murder in the first
degree, based on intent. Malice is a required element of murder. Manslaughter
Culpable Homicide in Scotland is a lesser variety of killing committed in the
absence of malice, brought about by reasonable provocation, or diminished
capacity. Involuntary manslaughter, where it is recognized, is a killing that lacks all
but the most attenuated guilty intent, recklessness. Settled insanity is a possible
defense.

Personal offenses

Many criminal codes protect the physical integrity of the body. The crime of
battery is traditionally understood as an unlawful touching, although this does not
include everyday knocks and jolts to which people silently consent as the result of
presence in a crowd. Creating a fear of imminent battery is an assault, and also
may give rise to criminal liability. Non-consensual intercourse, or rape, is a
particularly egregious form of battery.

Property offenses

Property often is protected by the criminal law. Trespassing is unlawful entry onto
the real property of another. Many criminal codes provide penalties for conversion,
embezzlement, theft, all of which involve deprivations of the value of the property.
Robbery is a theft by force. Fraud in the UK is a breach of the Fraud Act 2006 by
false representation, by failure to disclose information or by abuse of position.

Participatory offenses

Some criminal codes criminalize association with a criminal venture or
involvement in criminality that does not actually come to fruition. Some examples
are aiding, abetting, conspiracy, and attempt. However, in Scotland, the English
concept of Aiding and Abetting is known as Art and Part Liability. See Glanville
Williams, Textbook of Criminal Law, London: Stevens & Sons, 1983; Glanville
Williams, Criminal Law the General Part London: Stevens & Sons, 1961.

Mala inse v. mala prohibita

While crimes are typically broken into degrees or classes to punish appropriately,
all offenses can be divided into mala in se and mala prohibita' laws. Both are Latin
legal terms, mala in se meaning crimes that are thought to be inherently evil or
morally wrong, and thus will be widely regarded as crimes regardless of

                                                             100
jurisdiction. Mala in se offenses are felonies, property crimes, immoral acts and
corrupt acts by public officials. Mala prohibita, on the other hand, refers to
offenses that do not have wrongfulness associated with them. Parking in a
restricted area, driving the wrong way down a one-way street, jaywalking or
unlicensed fishing are examples of acts that are prohibited by statute, but without
which are not considered wrong. Mala prohibita statutes are usually imposed
strictly, as there does not need to be mens rea component for punishment under
those offenses, just the act itself. For this reason, it can be argued that offenses that
are mala prohibita are not really crimes at all.

GENERAL DEFENCES TO CRIMINAL LIABILITY

In criminal law, all acts or omissions which amount to crimes are not punished at
all times. There are situations in which due to the circumstances of the case, some
defences can be raised to free the accused from criminal liability. There are a
number of these defences. However, due to constraints of space and time only a
handful of them would be discussed. The defences to criminal liability which
would be discussed include the following:

1.The Defence of De Minimis Non Curat Lex

The latin maxim de minimis non curat lex literally interprets to mean that the law
does not concern itself with trifles. As a defence in criminal law, where an offence
is so trivial, it can be used as a defence. The statutory backing for this defence is
not in the Criminal Code. It is however in S. 58 of the Penal Code which
provides:Nothing is an offence by reason that it causes or that it is intended to
cause or that it is likely to cause an injury if that injury is so slight that no person of
ordinary sense and temper would complain of the injury. As a result, if someone is
charged to court for stealing a pen worth 20 Naira, this defence can be utilised to
escape liability.

2.The Defence of Accident

According to the provisions of S. 24 of the Criminal Code, a person is not
criminally responsible for an act that occurs independently of the exercise of his
will or if it occurs by accident. However, this is subject to the provisions of the
Criminal Code in relation to negligent acts and omissions. In the case of Iromantu
vs State 1964 1 All NLR 311, the deceased grabbed a gun from the accused. In the
struggle to collect back the gun, the accused mistakenly touched the trigger and the

                                                             101
gun went off, killing the deceased. The court held that the accused was not
criminally liable since the act occurred independently of the exercise of his will.

It should however be noted that accident would not apply if it is reasonably
foreseeable that the criminal event would occur. In the case of State vs Appoh
1970 2 All NLR 218, two boys were pushing themselves near the river. While
doing this, they were warned by another boy that the two boys were playing a
dangerous game. As they continued, one of the boys pushed the other into the river
and he drowned. The court held that the defence of accident would not apply since
it is reasonably foreseeable that pushing near a river could lead to drowning.

In the case of Ukot vs State (1992) 5 NWLR pt 240, the accused swung a pen knife
in a crowd in order to escape. While swinging the knife, it hit someone and killed
him. The accused pleaded accident but the court did not grant his plea because it
was reasonably foreseeable that by swinging a pen knife in a crowd, the knife
could hit anyone.

3. The Defence of Mistake

The defence of mistake applies to a mistake of fact. This is embodied under S.25 of
the Criminal Code. It provides that a person who acts or refuses to do an act under
a reasonable but mistaken belief in a state of affairs, is not criminally responsible.
However this would apply if, had the mistaken facts being true, the act would not
be criminal.

Before the defence of mistake can be successful, the following must be fulfilled:

    It must be a mistake of fact and not of law.
    The mistake must be honest and reasonable.
    There would be no greater liability if the mistaken facts were found to be

       true.

4. Mistake of Fact not of Law

According to the provision of S. 22 of the Criminal Code, Ignorance of the law is
not an excuse to criminal liability unless the the law creating the offence states
knowledge of the law to be an element of the offence. This is encapsulated in the
maxim ignoratia juris non excusat.In the case of Sherras vs De. Rutzen the
accused was held not to be liable under S. 16(1) of the Licensing Act when he
served beer to a police officer who he thought was off duty since he wasn`t

                                                             102
wearing his uniform. The above case is a mistake of fact not of law since he
thought the officer was off duty.

For the defence of mistake to apply, the mistake must be one that is honest and
reasonable. In the case of R vs Gaddam(1954) 14 WACA 442 the accused killed
an old woman who he believed was a witch. The West African Court of Appeal
held that this belief was unreasonable and thus a mistake of fact would not be
applicable.

For the defence of mistake to hold, if the mistaken facts were actually true, there
wouldn`t be liability. For instance in the case of R vs Gaddam as stated above,
even if the deceased was actually a witch, killing her extrajudicially was still a
crime, thus the defence of mistake would not apply. It should be noted that there
are instances in which the law states that the defence of mistake would not apply.
For example, according to S. 233 of the Criminal Code, if a person has sex with a
girl under a specific age, it is not an excuse that he didn`t know or he believed that
she was under such age.

5. The Defence of a Bonafide Claim of Right

This defence is contained under the provision of S. 23 of the Criminal Code. This
section provides that a person would not be criminally liable for an act or omission
done in relation to property in the exercise of an honest claim of right over the
property and without an intention to defraud.The scope of property in this
provision has been defined by the provision of S. 1 of the Criminal Code which
defines a property as everything animate or inanimate capable of being the subject
of ownership. This covers all kinds of property, including land.

In the case of R v. Vega (1938) 40 WACA, the accused was prosecuted for
stealing some corrugated iron sheets which were lying around. The accused raised
the defence that he took the sheets on the honest belief that they had been
abandoned since they were lying there for a long time. The court acceded to this
defence.

6. The Defence of Necessity and Extraordinary Emergency

This defence is contained under the provisions of S. 26 of the Criminal Code.
This sections provides that except in the case of compulsion, provocation or self-
defence, a person would not be liable for acts or omissions which would result in
an offence if such acts or omissions were done in sudden circumstances of
extraordinary emergency that a normal person would not have acted otherwise.

                                                             103
It should be noted that this defence has limitations. In the case of R vs Dudley
Stephens two shipmen were stranded at sea with a cabin boy. In order to sustain
their life, they killed and ate the cabin boy. They court convicted them but their
imprisonment was reduced to six months because of the necessary nature of
situation. Generally, judicial opinion doesn`t favour the taking of a person`s life for
the satisfaction of necessity. In the case of Buckcoke vs Greater London Council
a fire truck driver, in an attempt to rescue a man from a burning building,
disobeyed the traffic light, causing injury to another person. Lord Denning held
that the fire truck driver was liable for the injury. It should be noted that in this
case of the fire truck, the situation was not to the extent that the driver had no other
choice to make as provided for in S. 26 of the Criminal Code. This is probably
the reason why his defence of necessity could not hold sway.

Judicial Officers and the Execution of the Law

A judicial officer has been defined in S. 1 of the Criminal Code to include the
Justices of the Supreme Court, Court of Appeal, Federal High Court, State High
Court and an administrative officer engaged in a judicial act, proceeding or
inquiry. According to the provision of S. 31 of the Criminal Code, except as
provided by the Criminal Code, a judicial officer is not criminally responsible for
acts done or omitted to be done by him in exercise of judicial functions.

In the case of Anderson vs Gorrie (1894) 1 QB 668 it was held that no criminal
action could be brought against a judge of a superior court in respect of an act done
by him in his judicial capacity even if there is evidence that he acted maliciously.
Also, S. 32 (1) provides that a person would not be criminally liable for any act or
omission that is done in execution of the provisions of the law.However, according
to the provision of S. 32 (4) of the Criminal Code, this would not apply to acts or
omission which would result in death or grievous bodily harm.

Criminal procedure is the adjudication process of the criminal law. While criminal
procedure differs dramatically by jurisdiction, the process generally begins with a
formal criminal charge, and results in the conviction or acquittal of the defendant.
Criminal procedure can be either in form of inquisitorial or adversarial criminal
procedure.

Basic rights

Currently, in many countries with a democratic system and the rule of law,
criminal procedure puts the burden of proof on the prosecution that is, it is up to
the prosecution to prove that the defendant is guilty beyond any reasonable doubt,

                                                             104
as opposed to having the defense prove that s/he is innocent, and any doubt is
resolved in favor of the defendant. This provision, known as the presumption of
innocence, is required, for example, in the 46 countries that are members of the
Council of Europe, under Article 6 of the European Convention on Human Rights,
and it is included in other human rights documents. However, in practice it
operates somewhat differently in different countries.

Similarly, all such jurisdictions allow the defendant the right to legal counsel and
provide any defendant who cannot afford their own lawyer with a lawyer paid for
at the public expense which is in some countries called a court-appointed lawyer.
The fundamental rights are as follows:

   1. Right to be informed about the crime for which the person is being arrested.
   2. Right to be presented before a judicial officer within three days of custody.
   3. In Zimbabwe, the accused has the right to be granted bail on application.

Difference in criminal and civil procedures

Most countries make a rather clear distinction between civil and criminal
procedures. For example, an Englishcriminal court may force a defendant to pay a
fine as punishment for his crime, and he may sometimes have to pay the legal costs
of the prosecution. But the victim of the crime pursues his claim for compensation
in a civil, not a criminal, action. In France, Italy, and many countries besides, the
victim of a crime known as the injured party may be awarded damages by a
criminal courtjudge. The standards of proof are higher in a criminal action than in a
civil one since the loser risks not only financial penalties but also being sent to
prison or, in some countries, executed. In English law the prosecution must prove
the guilt of a criminal beyond reasonable doubt, but the plaintiff in a civil action is
required to prove his case on the balance of probabilities. Beyond reasonable doubt
is not defined for the jury which decides the verdict, but it has been said by appeal
courts that proving guilt beyond reasonable doubt requires the prosecution to
exclude any reasonable hypothesis consistent with innocence: Plomp v. R. In a
civil case, however, the court simply weighs the evidence and decides what is most
probable.

Criminal and civil procedure are different. Although some systems, including the
English, allow a private citizen to bring a criminal prosecution against another
citizen, criminal actions are nearly always started by the state. Civil actions, on the
other hand, are usually started by individuals. In Anglo-American law, the party
bringing a criminal action that is, in most cases, the state is called the prosecution,

                                                             105
but the party bringing a civil action is the plaintiff. In both kinds of action the other
party is known as the defendant. A criminal case against a person called Ms.
Sanchez would be described as United States vs. Sanchez in the United States if
initiated by the federal government; if initiated by a state, it would typically be
called Name of the State vs. Sanchez or The People vs. Sanchez. In England, it
would be styled R. Regina, that is, the Queen vs. Sanchez. But a civil action
between Ms. Sanchez and a Mr. Smith would be Sanchez vs. Smith if started by
Sanchez, and Smith vs. Sanchez if started by Mr. Smith.

Evidence given at a criminal trial is not necessarily admissible in a civil action
about the same matter, just as evidence given in a civil cause is not necessarily
admissible on a criminal trial. For example, the victim of a road accident does not
directly benefit if the driver who injured him is found guilty of the crime of
careless driving. He still has to prove his case in a civil action. In fact he may be
able to prove his civil case even when the driver is found not guilty in the criminal
trial. If the accused has given evidence on his trial he may be cross-examined on
those statements in a subsequent civil action regardless of the criminal verdict.
Once the plaintiff has shown that the defendant is liable, the main argument in a
civil court is about the amount of money, or damages, which the defendant should
pay to the plaintiff.

Constitutional law

The term constitution comes through French from the Latin word constitutio, used
for regulations and orders, such as the imperial enactments constitutiones principis:
edicta, mandata, decreta, rescripta. Later, the term was widely used in canon law
for an important determination, especially a decree issued by the Pope, now
referred to as an apostolic constitution

Most commonly, the term constitution refers to a set of rules and principles that
define the nature and extent of government. Most constitutions seek to regulate the
relationship between institutions of the state, in a basic sense the relationship
between the executive, legislature and the judiciary, but also the relationship of
institutions within those branches. For example, executive branches can be divided
into a head of government, government departments/ministries, executive agencies
and a civil service/administration. Most constitutions also attempt to define the
relationship between individuals and the state, and to establish the broad rights of
individual citizens. It is thus the most basic law of a territory from which all the
other laws and rules are hierarchically derived; in some territories it is in fact
called "Basic Law.

                                                             106
A constitution is a set of fundamental principles or established precedents
according to which a state or other organization is governed.[1] These rules together
make up, i.e. constitute, what the entity is. When these principles are written down
into a single document or set of legal documents, those documents may be said to
embody a written constitution; if they are written down in a single comprehensive
document, it is said to embody a codified constitution. Some constitutions such as
the constitution of the United Kingdom are uncodified, but written in numerous
fundamental Acts of a legislature, court cases or treaties.

Constitutions concern different levels of organizations, from sovereign states to
companies and unincorporated associations. A treaty which establishes an
international organization is also its constitution, in that it would define how that
organization is constituted. Within states, a constitution defines the principles upon
which the state is based, the procedure in which laws are made and by whom.
Some constitutions, especially codified constitutions, also act as limiters of state
power, by establishing lines which a state's rulers cannot cross, such as
fundamental rights.

The Constitution of India is the longest written constitution of any sovereign
country in the world, containing 444 articles in 22 parts,12 schedules and 118
amendments, with 146,385 words in its English-language version, while the
Constitution of Monaco is the shortest written constitution, containing 10 chapters
with 97 articles, and a total of 3,814 wor

General features

Generally, every modern written constitution confers specific powers to an
organization or institutional entity, established upon the primary condition that it
abide by the said constitution's limitations. According to Scott Gordon, a political
organization is constitutional to the extent that it containsinstitutionalized
mechanisms of power control for the protection of the interests and liberties of the
citizenry, including those that may be in the minority.

Activities of officials within an organization or polity that fall within the
constitutional or statutory authority of those officials are termed within power or,
in Latin, intra vires; if they do not, they are termed beyond power or, in Latin,
ultra vires. For example, a students' union may be prohibited as an organization
from engaging in activities not concerning students; if the union becomes involved
in non-student activities, these activities are considered to be ultra vires of the
union's charter, and nobody would be compelled by the charter to follow them. An

                                                             107
example from the constitutional law of sovereign states would be a provincial
parliament in a federal state trying to legislate in an area that the constitution
allocates exclusively to the federal parliament, such as ratifying a treaty. Action
that appears to be beyond power may be judicially reviewed and, if found to be
beyond power, must cease. Legislation that is found to be beyond power will be
invalid and of no force; this applies to primary legislation, requiring constitutional
authorization, and secondary legislation, ordinarily requiring statutory
authorization. In this context, within power, intra vires, authorized and valid have
the same meaning; as do beyond power, ultra vires, not authorized and invalid.

In most but not all modern states the constitution has supremacy over ordinary
statutory lawin such states when an official act is unconstitutional, i.e. it is not a
power granted to the government by the constitution, that act is null and void, and
the nullification is ab initio, that is, from inception, not from the date of the
finding. It was never law, even though, if it had been a statute or statutory
provision, it might have been adopted according to the procedures for adopting
legislation. Sometimes the problem is not that a statute is unconstitutional, but the
application of it is, on a particular occasion, and a court may decide that while
there are ways it could be applied that are constitutional, that instance was not
allowed or legitimate. In such a case, only the application may be ruled
unconstitutional. Historically, the remedy for such violations have been petitions
for common law writs, such as quo warranto.

Types of Constitution:

1. Written Constitution:

A written constitution means a constitution written in the form of a book or a series
of documents combined in the form of a book. It is a consciously framed and
enacted constitution. It is formulated and adopted by a constituent assembly or a
council or a legislature. Garner writes, "A written constitution is a consciously
planned constitution, formulated and adopted by deliberate actions of a constituent
assembly or a convention." It provides for a definite design of government
institutions, their organisations, powers, functions and inter-relationships.

It embodies the constitutional law of the state. It enjoys the place of supremacy.
The government is fully bound by its provisions and works strictly in accordance
with its provisions. A written constitution can be amended only in accordance with
a settled process of amendment written in the constitution itself. It is a duly passed

                                                             108
and enacted Constitution. The Constitutions of India, the USA, Germany, Japan,
Canada, France, Switzerland and several other states, are written constitutions.

2. Unwritten Constitution:

An unwritten constitution is one which is neither drafted nor enacted by a
Constituent Assembly and nor even written in the form of a book. It is found in
several historical charters, laws and conventions. It is a product of slow and
gradual evolution. The government is organised and it functions in accordance
with several well settled, but not wholly written rules and conventions. The people
know their Constitution. They accept and obey it, but do not possess it in a written
form. An unwritten constitution cannot be produced in the form of a book.

However, an unwritten constitution is not totally unwritten. Some of its parts are
available in written forms but these do not stand codified in the form of a legal
document or a code or a book. According to Garner, an unwritten constitution is
one in which most and not all, rules are unwritten and these are not found in any
one charter or document. The Constitution of the United Kingdom is an unwritten
constitution.

Difference between Written and Unwritten Constitutions:

(1) A written constitution is written in the form of a book or document, whereas an
unwritten constitution is not written in such a form.

(2) A written constitution is a made and enacted by a constituent assembly of the
people. An unwritten constitution is the result of a gradual process of constitutional
evolution. It is never written by any assembly.

(3) A written constitution is usually less flexible than an unwritten constitution. An
unwritten constitution depends mostly on unwritten rules or conventions which do
not require any formal amendment.

(4) A written constitution is definite. Its provisions can be quoted in support or
against any power exercised by the government. An unwritten constitution cannot
be produced in evidence. It has to be proved by quoting its sources and practices.

However, the difference between written and unwritten constitutions is not
organic. A written constitution has written parts in majority. Along with these, it
also has some unwritten parts in the form of conventions. In an unwritten
constitution, most of the parts are unwritten and are not written in the form of a

                                                             109
book. However some of its parts are also found written in some charters and other
documents.

3. Flexible Constitution:

A Flexible Constitution is one which can be easily amended. Several political
scientists advocate the view that a flexible constitution is one in which the
constitutional law can be amended in the same way as an ordinary law.
Constitutional amendments are passed in the same manner by which an ordinary
law is passed.

British Constitution presents a classic example of a most flexible constitution. The
British Parliament is a sovereign parliament which can make or amend any law or
constitutional law by a simple majority. Laws aiming to affect changes in a
constitutional law or in any ordinary law are passed through the same legislative
procedure i.e., by a simple majority of votes in the legislature. Similarly, a
Constitution is flexible when the procedure of amending it is simple and the
changes can be made easily.

Merits of a Flexible Constitution:

(i) First, a major merit of the flexible constitution is its ability to change easily in
accordance with the changes in the social and political environment of the society
and state.

(ii) Secondly, it is very helpful in meeting emergencies because it can be easily
amended.

(iii) Thirdly, because of its dynamic nature, there are less opportunities for revolt.
The constitution has the ability to keep pace with the changing times. The people
do not feel the need for revolutionary changes.

(iv) Finally, since the flexible constitution keeps on developing with times, it
always continues to be popular and remains up-to-date.

Demerits of a Flexible Constitution:

(i) First, a flexible constitution is often, a source of instability. Flexibility enables
the government in power to give it a desired dress and content.

                                                             110
(ii) Secondly, it is not suitable for a federation. In a federation, a flexible
constitution can lead to undesirable changes in the constitution by the federal
government or by the governments of federating units.

4. Rigid Constitution:

The Rigid Constitution is one which cannot be easily amended. Its method of
amendment is difficult. For amending it, the legislature has to pass an amendment
bill by a specific, usually big, majority of 2/3rd or 3/4th. For passing or amending
an ordinary law, the legislature usually passes the law by a simple majority of its
members. A rigid constitution is considered to be the most fundamental law of the
land. It is regarded as the basic will of the sovereign people. That is why it can be
amended only by a special procedure requiring the passing of the amendment
proposal by a big majority of votes which is often followed by ratification by the
people in a referendum. The Constitution of United States of America is a very
rigid constitution.

Merits of a Rigid Constitution:

(i) First, a rigid constitution is a source of stability in administration.

(ii) Secondly, it maintains continuity in administration.

(iii) Thirdly, it cannot become a tool in the hands of the party exercising the power
of the state at a particular time.

(iv) Fourthly it prevents autocratic exercise of the powers by the government.

(v) Finally a rigid constitution is ideal for a federation.

Demerits of a Rigid Constitution:

(i) First, the chief demerit of a rigid constitution is that it fails to keep pace with
fast changing social environment.

(ii) Secondly, because of its inability to change easily, at times, it hinders the
process of social development.

(iii) Thirdly, it can be a source of hindrance during emergencies.

                                                             111
(iv) Fourthly, its inability to easily change can lead to revolts against the
government.

(v) Fifthly, a rigid constitution can be a source of conservativeness. It can grow
becomes old very soon because it cannot Keep pace with times.

Thus, there are both merits and demerits of Flexible and Rigid Constitutions. The
decision whether a state should have a flexible or a rigid constitution, should be
taken on the basis of the needs and wishes of society. No hard and fast rule can be
laid down as to whether a state should have a flexible or a rigid constitution. In
fact, a constitution must have both a certain degree of rigidity as well as an ability
to change for keeping pace with the changing times. An excessive rigidity or
excessive flexibility should be avoided. The Constitution of India is partly rigid
and partly flexible. In several respects, it is a rigid constitution but in practice it has
mostly worked as a flexible constitution.

5. Enacted Constitution:

An Enacted Constitution is a man-made constitution. It is made, enacted and
adopted by an assembly or council called a Constituent Assembly or Constitutional
Council. It is duly passed after a thorough discussion over its objectives, principles
and provisions. It is written in the form of a book or as a series of documents and
in a systematic and formal manner. The Constitutions of India the USA, Japan,
China and most of other states are enacted constitutions.

Qualities of a Good Constitution:

1. Constitution must be systematically written.

2. It should incorporate the constitutional law of the state and enjoy supremacy.

3. It should have the ability to develop and change in accordance with the changes
in the environment and needs of the people.

4. It should be neither unduly rigid nor unduly flexible.

5. It must provide for Fundamental Rights and Freedoms of the people.

6. It should clearly define the organisation, powers, functions inter-relations of the
government of the state and its three organs.

                                                             112
7. It must provide for the organisation of a representative, responsible, limited and
accountable government.

8. It must provide for: Rule of Law, De-centralisation of powers, Independent and
powerful Judiciary, A system of Local self-government, A Sound Method of
Amendment of the Constitution and Process and Machinery for the conduct of free
and elections

9. The Constitution must clearly reflect the sovereignty of the people.

10. The language of the constitution should be simple, clear and unambiguous

The Constitution must empower the judiciary with the power to interpret, protect
and defend the Constitution and the fundamental rights and freedoms of the people
against the possible legislative and executive excesses. These are the basic features
which must be present in every good Constitution.

Importance of Constitution:

Each state has a Constitution which lays down the organisation, powers and
functions of the Government of the State. The government always works according
to the Constitution, no law or order of the government can violate the Constitution.
Constitution is the supreme law and all government institutions and members are
bound by it.

Constitution enjoys supreme importance in the state because:

1. It reflects the sovereign will of the people.

2. It lays down of the aims, objectives, values and goals which the people want to
secure. .

3. It contains description and guarantee of the fundamental rights of the people.

4. It gives a detailed account of the organisation of the government. The
organisation, powers and functions of its three organs of the and their inter-
relationship.

5. In a federation, the Constitution lays down the division of powers between the
central government and the governments of the federating states/provinces. It is
binding upon both the centre and the state governments.

                                                             113
6. It specifies the power and method of amendment of the Constitution.

7. It lays down the election system and political rights of people.

8. It provides for independence of judiciary and rule of law.

9. The constitution governs all and no one can violate its rules.

4.0 SUMMARY

A constitutional crisis is an event where in a particular part of a constitution is or
are not being followed in accordance with the policies or actions taken by the
authorities. There are different types of Constitution; these are the Written
Constitution, the Unwritten Constitution, the Conventional or Enacted
Constitution, the Cumulative or Evolve Constitution, the Rigid or Inelastic
Constitution and the Flexible or Elastic Constitution. All of the above mentioned
constitutions have their different features and characteristics. The Written
Constitution is the constitution where the provisions are all contained in a single
document. The Unwritten Constitution is the constitution where the provisions are
not contained in a single document. The provisions are written in different

5.0 CONCLUSION

The Constitution`s system of checks and balances sets the various branches against
each other for the laudable purpose of constraining tyranny. However, due to
partisan polarization, individual corruption, or any number of other reasons,
sometimes the political institutions in these arrangements fail, sending the
governmental system into a crisis. This was the type of constitutional crisis
commentators were seemingly referring to in describing reports that Customs and
Border Protection agents members of the executive branch weren`t following
orders from the judicial branch. In theory, clashes between different parts of
government could regularly produce constitutional crises, but in reality, they often
don`t. Had Nixon ignored the Supreme Court ruling ordering him to turn over
tapes of conversations he had recorded in the Oval Office, that would have been a
huge crisis of this genre. But he didn`t.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Define a constitution and described the different types of constitution in a country
practicing democracy. In your opinion which one is more preferable state the
advantages.

                                                             114
7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING
Ryan, Fergus (2006). Round Hall nutshells Contract Law. Thomson Round Hall.
p. 1. ISBN 9781858001715.
Rose & Frank Co. v JR Crompton & Bros Ltd. [1923] 2 K.B. 261, 273 (Bailhache
J). Westlaw.
Enright, Máiréad (2007). Principles of Irish Contract Law. Clarus Press.
DiMatteo L. (1997). The Counterpoise of Contracts: The Reasonable Person
Standard and the Subjectivity of Judgment. South Carolina Law Review.
George Hudson Holdings Ltd v Rudder (1973)128 CLR 387.

                                                             115
UNIT 3: LAW OF CONTRACT AND COMMERCIAL LAW

1.0 INTRODUCTION

At common law, the elements of a contract are offer, acceptance, intention to
create legal relations, and consideration. Not all agreements are necessarily
contractual, as the parties generally must be deemed to have an intention to be
legally bound. A so-called gentlemen's agreement is one which is not intended to
be legally enforceable, and which is binding in honour only.

2.0 OBJECTIVE:

At the end of the unit you should be able to understand

*the definition of contracts

*The elements of contract

* processes of termination contract and the nature of damages

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Simply put, a contract is an agreement between two or more people or entities that
creates a legal duty or responsibility. Entities entering a contract might include
individual people, companies, corporations and organizations, but there are a few
conditions that must be met for the contract to hold water in the courtroom.
Specifically, a legally enforceable contract must contain some key ingredients:

A contract is a voluntary arrangement between two or more parties that is
enforceable by law as a binding legal agreement. Contract is a branch of the law of
obligations in jurisdictions of the civil law tradition. Contract law concerns the
rights and duties that arise from agreements. A contract arises when the parties
agree that there is an agreement. Formation of a contract generally requires an
offer, acceptance, consideration, and a mutual intent to be bound. Each party to a
contract must have capacity to enter the agreement. Minors, intoxicated persons,
and those under a mental affliction may have insufficient capacity to enter a
contract.

                                                             116
Characteristics of a valid contracts are:

Competency: Everyone involved must be competent. This means that a person
who is severely mentally disabled can't enter an enforceable contract. Additionally,
contracts entered by minors usually can't be enforced until they reach age 18 or
whatever the majority age is where they reside.

A contract is much more than an agreement between two people. There must be an
offer and acceptance, intention to create a legally binding agreement, a price paid
not necessarily money, a legal capacity to enter a contract of your own free will,
and proper understanding and consent of what is involved. Any duress, false
statements, undue influence or unconscionable dealings could make a contract
illegal and void.

Offer and acceptance

A contract is formed when an offer by one party is accepted by the other party.An
offer must be distinguished from mere willingness to deal or negotiate. For
example, X offers to make and sell to Y calendars featuring Australian paintings.
Before any agreement is reached on size, quality, style or price, Y decides not to
continue. At this stage, there is no legally binding contract between X and Y
because there is no definite offer for Y to accept until the essential terms of the
bargain have been decided.

An offer need not be made to a specific person. It may be made to a person, a class
of people, or to the whole world. An offer is a definite promise to be bound,
provided the terms of the offer are accepted. This means that there must be
acceptance of precisely what has been offered. For example, a used car dealer
offers to sell B a Holden panel van for $1,000, without a roadworthy certificate. If
B decides to buy the Holden panel van, but insists on a roadworthy certificate
being provided, then B is not accepting the used car dealer`s offer. Rather, B is
making a counter offer. It is then up to the used car dealer to accept or reject the
counter offer.

A person can withdraw the offer that has been proposed before that offer is
accepted. For withdrawal to be effective, the person who has proposed the offer
must communicate to the other party that the offer has been withdrawn. To
continue the example above, the used car dealer may say to B that he`ll check with
his supervisor and maybe a roadworthy certificate can be provided. If, while
waiting for a reply, B decides he does not want to buy the Holden panel van and he
tells the used car dealer of his change of mind, then there is no binding contract.

                                                             117
Acceptance occurs when the party answering the offer agrees to the offer by way
of a statement or an act. Acceptance must be unequivocal and communicated to the
offer or: the law will not deem a person to have accepted an offer merely because
they have not expressly rejected it. Some modifications to the rules of offer and
acceptance have been made to protect consumers by sections 18 and 41 of the
Competition and Consumer Act 2010 schedule 2 Australian Consumer Law; for
example, invitations or offers to purchase cannot be misleading or deceptive.

Intention to create legal relations

A contract does not exist simply because there is an agreement between people.
The parties to the agreement must intend to enter into a legally binding agreement.
This will rarely be stated explicitly but will usually be able to be inferred from the
circumstances in which the agreement was made. For example, offering a friend a
ride in your car is not usually intended to create a legally binding relation. You
may, however, have agreed with your friend to share the costs of travelling to work
on a regular basis and agree that each Friday your friend will pay you $20 for the
running costs of the car. Here, the law is more likely to recognise that a contract
was entered into.

Commercially based agreements are seen as including a rebuttable intention to
create a legally binding agreement. However, the law presumes that domestic or
social agreements are not intended to create legal relations. For example, an
arrangement between siblings will not be presumed to be a legally binding
contract. A person who wants to enforce a domestic or social agreement needs to
prove that the parties did intend to create a legally binding agreement.

Consideration

Consideration is the price paid for the promise of the other party. The price must
be something of value, although it need not be money. Consideration may be some
right, interest or benefit going to one party or some forbearance, detriment, loss or
responsibility given, suffered or undertaken by the other party.So long as
consideration exists, the court will not question its adequacy, provided that it is of
some value. For example, the promise to pay a peppercorn rent in return for the
lease of a house would be good consideration. Of course, the consideration must
not be illegal or impossible to perform. There is an exception to the rule:
documents under seal (deeds) do not require consideration for there to be a binding
contract. However, since few contracts between people are made in this way, it is
not discussed further in this chapter.

                                                             118
Legal capacity

Not all people are completely free to enter into a valid contract. The contracts of
the groups of people listed below involve problematic consent, and are dealt with
separately, as follows: people who have a mental impairment; young people
minors; bankrupts; corporations people acting on behalf of a company; and
prisoners.

Parties must be sane

Generally speaking, people are free to enter into contracts even though they may
have a mental impairment, or are temporarily disabled by drugs or alcohol. They
are, however, sometimes vulnerable to being bound by contracts they do not fully
understand. The question of capacity to make the contract often arises only after
the contract is in place. People with disabilities and their advocates will find some
protection in the rule that a contract is not valid and enforceable unless there was
genuine consent to its making.

Capacity to give consent involves a general understanding of the nature of the
contract not necessarily its fine details. A person with a mental impairment, for
example, may have the capacity to understand some contracts e.g. buying a loaf of
bread, but not to understand other, more complicated contracts e.g. buying a car on
credit. Where a person with a disability did not understand the general nature of the
contract, a court can intervene to set aside the contract only if: the other party knew
or ought to have known of the disability or lack of capacity and it would be unfair
for them to take advantage of that; and the benefit received by the other person has
not been sold to a third party who did not know the previous transaction might not
be valid. Generally, to escape the consequences of a contract, the other party
should be notified of the intention not to be bound by the contract within a
reasonable time.

Some people with disabilities temporary or long-term are assisted by an
administrator appointed by the Guardianship List of the Victorian Civil and
Administrative Tribunal. For further information on the role of an administrator,
People with disabilities who have an administrator appointed to act on their behalf
are generally not free to enter into contracts, unless this is approved in writing by
their administrator or an order of the Guardianship List of VCAT.

A person with an intellectual or psychiatric disability will be liable to pay only a
reasonable price for necessaries sold and delivered s 7 Goods Act 1958.
Necessaries·, and the rules applicable here, are dealt with in Young people,

                                                             119
below, because the definition is the same for both groups. The term young person
is used here to refer to anyone under the age of 18 years (s 3 Age of Majority Act
1977. Sometimes legal writing refers to minors or infants.The exact capacity of
young people to bind themselves and be bound by contract is limited but also
unclear, because no Act of Parliament completely covers this area of law. The
Supreme Court Act 1986 (Vic) in sections 49 to 51, Contracts of Minors, is the
most useful reference on this question.

Consent of the parties

Entering into a contract must involve the elements of free will and proper
understanding of what each of the parties is doing. In other words, the consent of
each of the parties to a contract must be genuine. Only where the essential element
of proper consent has been given is there a contract that is binding upon the parties.
The ultimate consequences of establishing that no proper consent was given to
enter the contract are matters dealt with when considering remedies for breach of
contract seeTaking action as a consumer. Proper consent may be affected by any of
the following matters: mistake; false statements; duress; and undue influence or
unconscionability.

MISTAKE VITIATES CONTRACTS

Only a few types of mistakes will cause the contract to be non-binding on the
parties to it: they must be mistakes that go to the very basis of the agreement. For
example, where there is a contract for the sale of a car that both parties assume to
exist, although in reality it has been destroyed by fire, this contract is non-binding
on the parties. By contrast, where the parties are only mistaken about the model of
the car, then this contract would be binding.

Another example is when a person signs a written document mistakenly believing
that it relates to something entirely different from what in fact it does relate to, in
this case the person will not be bound by it. This means that if X is told to sign a
document that X reasonably believes to be something like a character reference to
assist Z to obtain a loan from a finance company, and the document is later
discovered to have been a guarantee of the loan contract, then the guarantee will
not be binding on X.

A third example is when Y cannot read, due to blindness, illiteracy or other
disability. Someone else tells Y what is in the document and Y signs it. The

                                                             120
document Y signed is not what Y was told it was. The document Y signed would
not be binding on Y.

By contrast, if a person who signs a document ­ believing it to be a contract does
not read the terms and conditions, that person will be bound by the contract and
will not be entitled to plead mistake.

Other factors may also be relevant to a successful plea of mistake. For instance,
whether or not the defence of mistake will be allowed often depends on whether an
innocent third party will be adversely affected by a decision that the contract is
non-binding. Again, if the signer was careless and failed to take reasonable
precautions, the defence will not be allowed to succeed. For these reasons, it is
wise to seek legal advice about whether or not a court would hold the contract
binding on these grounds. A mistake is an incorrect understanding by one or more
parties to a contract and may be used as grounds to invalidate the agreement.
Common law has identified three types of mistake in contract: common mistake,
mutual mistake, and unilateral mistake.

Common mistake occurs when both parties hold the same mistaken belief of the
facts. This is demonstrated in the case of Bell v. Lever Brothers Ltd., which
established that common mistake can only void a contract if the mistake of the
subject-matter was sufficiently fundamental to render its identity different from
what was contracted, making the performance of the contract impossible see also
Svanosi v McNamara. In Great Peace Shipping Ltd v Tsavliris Salvage
International Ltd, the court held that the common law will grant relief against
common mistake, if the test in Bell v. Lever Bros Ltd is made out. If one party has
knowledge and the other does not, and the party with the knowledge promises or
guarantees the existence of the subject matter, that party will be in breach if the
subject matter does not exist.

Mutual mistake occurs when both parties of a contract are mistaken as to the
terms. Each believes they are contracting to something different. Courts usually try
to uphold such mistakes if a reasonable interpretation of the terms can be found.
However, a contract based on a mutual mistake in judgment does not cause the
contract to be voidable by the party that is adversely affected. See Raffles v.
Wichelhaus.

Unilateral mistake occurs when only one party to a contract is mistaken as to the
terms or subject-matter. The courts will uphold such a contract unless it was
determined that the non-mistaken party was aware of the mistake and tried to take

                                                             121
advantage of the mistake. It is also possible for a contract to be void if there was a
mistake in the identity of the contracting party. An example is in Lewis v. Avery
where Lord Denning MR held that the contract can only be voided if the plaintiff
can show that, at the time of agreement, the plaintiff believed the other party's
identity was of vital importance. A mere mistaken belief as to the credibility of the
other party is not sufficient.

ILLEGAL AND VOID CONTRACTS

The law will not enforce all contracts. There are some categories of contract to be
wary of.

Where a contract is illegal, this may affect its enforceability. Contracts that are
illegal by statute will be regulated as to enforceability by the statute; thus the
statute will need to be read and interpreted. Contracts absolutely prohibited by
statute will be void, whether the parties know of the illegality or not. However,
where one party performs an otherwise legal contract in a manner that breaches
legislation, the other party, if having no knowledge of the facts giving rise to the
illegality, can still enforce the contract or recover damages for breach of it. They
may also recover money or other property transferred under the contract.

Contracts made void by statute are treated differently; while they remain valid
contracts, the courts will not enforce them. Again, the precise extent of the
enforceability of, or the recovery of any money paid under, a void contract will
depend on the particular statute. Certain types of contracts are illegal at common
law, because they are contrary to the public good. These include contracts: to
commit a crime, a tort or a fraud; that are sexually immoral; that prejudice public
safety, including good relations with other states or countries; that prejudice the
administration of justice; that tend to promote corruption in public life; and to
defraud the revenue..

The general rule is that the contract is void only so far as it is contrary to the public
good; it is not void entirely. That is, the offending part can be removed provided
that the rest of the contract continues to make sense. However, contracts illegal at
common law are not severable that is, the illegal parts of the contract cannot be
removed or severed from the legal· parts.Money paid or property transferred
under a contract that is void at common law may be recoverable because the effect
of the contract being void is that there is no contract, so that the parties should be
put back to their original position.Other kinds of conduct that might or might not

                                                             122
affect the enforceability of a contract are covered by the ACL, which include
prohibitions against:

all of which are discussed in Consumer protection laws (see Misleading and
deceptive conduct·, Unconscionable conduct· and Prohibition of
misrepresentations.A contract is a legal document that binds at least two parties to
one another. A contract requires one or both parties meet obligations detailed in the
contract before it is completed. In some instances, contract termination can occur
that will make the contract void of legal binding. Only the parties involved in the
agreement may terminate a contract.

TERMINATION OF CONTRACT

A contract is a legal document that binds at least two parties to one another. A
contract requires one or both parties meet obligations detailed in the contract
before it is completed. In some instances, contract termination can occur that will
make the contract void of legal binding. Only the parties involved in the agreement
may terminate a contract.

1. Impossibility of Performance

A contract typically requires one or more parties to do something, which is called
performance. For example, a company may hire and sign a contract to have a
public speaker talk at a company event. Once the public speaker fulfills his duties
agreed upon in the contract, it is called performance. If for some reason it is
impossible for the public speaker to fulfill his duties, it is called impossibility of
performance. The company has the right to terminate the contract in the case of an
impossibility of performance.

2. Breach of Contract

When a contract is intentionally not honored by one party, it is called a breach of
contract and is grounds for contract termination. A breach of contract may exist
because one party failed to meet his obligations at all or did not meet his
obligations fully. A material breach of contract allows the hiring party to seek
monetary damages, and an immaterial breach of contract does not allow the party
to seek monetary damages. For example, if you purchased a product that did not
arrive until a day after the agreed upon delivery date, that is an immaterial breach
of contract. However, if your order did not come until two weeks after the delivery
date and it affected your business, then that is a material breach of contract.

                                                             123
3. Prior Agreement

You may terminate a contract if you and the other party have a prior written
agreement that calls for a contract termination because of a specific reason. The
agreement must give the details of what qualifies as a reason for contract
termination. It should also state what actions need to take place for one of the
parties to terminate the contract. In most cases, one party must submit a written
notice to the other party to terminate the contract.

4. Rescission

A rescission of a contract is when a contract is terminated because an individual
misrepresented themselves, acted illegally or made a mistake. For example, if you
bought a house but after further inspection you discover that the seller intentionally
hid the poor physical condition of the home, you may possibly terminate the
contract. A contract rescission may take place if one party is not old enough to
enter a contract or if a elderly person is not able to make legal decisions because of
incapacity.

5. Completion

A contract is essentially terminated once the obligations outlined in the contract are
completed. Parties should keep documentation showing that they fulfilled their
contract duties. Documentation is helpful if the other party tries to later dispute the
fulfillment of your contract obligations. A court of law will require proof of
contract fulfillment if a dispute occurs.

Discharge by performance
When a party performs their obligations required by the contract they are no longer
subject to it.

Termination for breach
Where one party commits a serious breach, the other party will be entitled to
terminate the contract. However it is important to realise that not every breach is
sufficiently serious to allow termination. If a party attempts to terminate a contract
without a legal right to do so, their actions will be regarded as repudiation of the
contract and the other party will gain a right to terminate and recover damages.

Termination for frustration
A contract is regarded as frustrated when one of the parties is unable to perform
what they contracted to do due to an unforseen intervening event. Frustration is

                                                             124
difficult to prove but if it can be established, both parties will be discharged from
their contractual obligations,

Payment of damages for breached of contract

There are several different types of damages.

Compensatory damages, which are given to the party which was detrimented by
the breach of contract. With compensatory damages, there are two heads of loss,
consequential damage and direct damage.

Liquidated damages are an estimate of loss agreed to in the contract, so that the
court avoids calculating compensatory damages and the parties have greater
certainty. Liquidated damages clauses may be called penalty clauses in ordinary
language, but the law distinguishes between liquidated damages legitimate and
penalties invalid. A test for determining which category a clause falls into was
established by the English House of Lords in Dunlop Pneumatic Tyre Co. Ltd v.
New Garage & Motor Co. Ltd

Nominal damages consist of a small cash amount where the court concludes that
the defendant is in breach but the plaintiff has suffered no quantifiable pecuniary
loss, and may be sought to obtain a legal record of who was at fault.

Punitive or exemplary damages are used to punish the party at fault; but even
though such damages are not intended primarily to compensate, nevertheless the
claimant and not the state receives the award. Exemplary damages are not
recognised nor permitted in some jurisdictions. In the UK, exemplary damages are
not available for breach of contract, but are possible after fraud. Although vitiating
factors (such as misrepresentation, mistake, undue influence and duress) relate to
contracts, they are not contractual actions, and so, in a roundabout way, a claimant
in contract may be able to get exemplary damages.

4.0 SUMMARY

A contract is a legally binding or valid agreement between two parties. The law
will consider a contract to be valid if the agreement contains all of the following
elements:

offer and acceptance; an intention between the parties to create binding relations;
consideration to be paid for the promise made; legal capacity of the parties to act;

                                                             125
genuine consent of the parties; and legality of the agreement. An agreement that
lacks one or more of the elements listed above is not a valid contract. Each of these
elements is dealt with in more detail in this section.

Not all contracts need to be in writing. Contracts that are required by law to be in
writing include contracts to buy and sell land or to buy a motor car and door-to-
door sales contracts. However, it is always useful to have the terms agreed between
the parties written down and attached to or kept with any other relevant papers; for
example, copies of quotations, brochures, pamphlets, etc. that were supplied at the
time the contract was entered into. Receipts for money paid should always be kept.
If a dispute arises, these documents will assist in resolving differences between the
parties. A written contract can be drawn up by listing all the terms agreed between
the parties and getting each of the parties to sign and date the document at the end.

5.0 CONCLUSION

An agreement with specific terms between two or more persons or entities in
which there is a promise to do something in return for a valuable benefit known as
consideration. Since the law of contracts is at the heart of most business dealings, it
is one of the three or four most significant areas of legal concern and can involve
variations on circumstances and complexities. The existence of a contract requires
finding the following factual elements: a. an offer; b) an acceptance of that offer
which results in a meeting of the minds; c) a promise to perform; d) a valuable
consideration which can be a promise or payment in some form; e) a time or event
when performance must be made (meet commitments); f) terms and conditions for
performance, including fulfilling promises; g) performance, if the contract is
"unilateral". A unilateral contract is one in which there is a promise to pay or give
other consideration in return for actual performance. I will pay you $500 to fix my
car by Thursday; the performance is fixing the car by that date. A bilateral contract
is one in which a promise is exchanged for a promise. promise to fix your car by
Thursday and you promise to pay $500 on Thursday. Contracts can be either
written or oral, but oral contracts are more difficult to prove and in most
jurisdictions the time to sue on the contract is shorter such as two years for oral
compared to four years for written. In some cases a contract can consist of several
documents, such as a series of letters, orders, offers and counteroffers. There are a
variety of types of contracts: "conditional" on an event occurring; "joint and

                                                             126
several," in which several parties make a joint promise to perform, but each is
responsible; "implied," in which the courts will determine there is a contract based
on the circumstances. Parties can contract to supply all of another's requirements,
buy all the products made, or enter into an option to renew a contract. The
variations are almost limitless. Contracts for illegal purposes are not enforceable at
law. 2 v. to enter into an agreement.

6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT

What is a contract and what constitute a valid contract in the eyes of the law?

7.0 REFERENCE/FURTHER READING

Ryan, Fergus (2006). Round Hall nutshells Contract Law. Thomson Round Hall.
p. 1. ISBN 9781858001715.

Rose & Frank Co. v JR Crompton & Bros Ltd. [1923] 2 K.B. 261, 273 (Bailhache
J). Westlaw.

Enright, Máiréad (2007). Principles of Irish Contract Law. Clarus Press.

DiMatteo L. (1997). The Counterpoise of Contracts: The Reasonable Person
Standard and the Subjectivity of Judgment. South Carolina Law Review.

George Hudson Holdings Ltd v Rudder (1973)128 CLR 387.

promise legal definition of promise. promise synonyms by the Free Online Law
Dictionary

Feinman JM, Brill SR. (2006). Is an Advertisement an Offer? Why it is, and Why
it Matters. Hastings Law Journal.

Wilmot et al, 2009, Contract Law, Third Edition, Oxford University Press, page 34

Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain v. Boots Cash Chemists (Southern) Ltd
[1953] 1 Q.B. 401) the offer is made by an action without any negotiations (such
as presenting goods to a cashier), the offer will be presumed to be on the terms
of the invitation to treat. </ref

                                                             127
Units 5: Business and Commercial Law

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Business law encompasses all of the laws that dictate how to form and run a
business. This includes all of the laws that govern how to start, buy, manage and
close or sell any type of business. Business laws establish the rules that all
businesses should follow. A savvy businessperson will be generally familiar with
business laws and know when to seek the advice of a licensed attorney. Business
law includes state and federal laws, as well as administrative regulations. Let's take
a look at some of the areas included under the umbrella of business law.

Much of business law addresses the different types of business organizations.
There are laws regarding how to properly form and run each type. This includes
laws about entities such as corporations, partnerships and limited liability
companies. For example, let's say I decide to start my own pet grooming business.
I need to decide what type of business I want to be. Will this be a partnership? Will
it be a sole proprietorship? What papers do I need to file in order to start this
business? These questions fall under the laws that govern business entities, which
are state laws. The type of entity I pick will also affect how I pay my federal
income taxes. These, of course, are federal laws.

Next, what will my business be called? Let's say I decide on Barks & Bubbles as a
name for my dog grooming company. Now I need to know if anyone else already
has that name. This is a trademark question. Patents, copyrights and trademarks are
part of intellectual property law. The federal law governs most intellectual property
law. Then I need to know if I'll require any special type of license for this business.
Do groomers need a license? Am I allowed to have animals on my property, or do I
need some sort of special permit? I'll need to check my local and state laws to find
out. How will I advertise my business? Am I allowed to say that I'm the 'best in
town?' This question falls under consumer protection law, which can be federal or
state law. Wow. That's a lot of business law, and I'm not even open for business
yet!

2.0 OBJECTIVES:

At the rnd of the unit you will be able to know

*The meaning of business and business law

*Types of business and commercial transactions

                                                             128
*the meaning of various terms

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Business law and commercial law are two areas of legal practice that have so many
overlapping issues that most attorneys who practice one will also have expertise in
the other. Commercial law focuses on the sale and distribution of goods, as well as
financing of certain transactions. Business law focuses on the other aspects of
business, including forming a company, mergers and acquisitions, shareholder
rights, and property issues such as leasing office or warehouse space. A business
that sells products will almost certainly need a lawyer with experience in both of
these fields.

Business law is regulated by both state and federal law. The federal government
primarily governs stocks and investments, workplace safety and employment laws,
and environmental protections. States, however, can add to these federal laws and
pass their own laws in other areas, such as imposing licensing requirements for
certain professions and establishing rules for forming and running a legal business.

Commercial law is primarily regulated by the Uniform Commercial Code (UCC),
which is a model set of laws regarding the sales of goods, leases of good,
negotiable instruments, and secured transactions. All states have adopted some
form of the UCC, though each state is free to make its own modifications to the
laws as it sees fit. Because many states have modified at least some of the UCC
provisions to fit their needs, it is important to hire a lawyer familiar with the UCC
as it has been enacted in your state.

Terms to Know

    Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) ­ A uniform law adopt in some form by
       all states that governs sales of goods and related issues, such as secured
       transactions and negotiable instruments

    Negotiable Instrument: A document, such as a note or check, that contains
       an unconditional promise to pay a specified amount of money on demand or
       at a specified time

    Merger :The absorption of one company by another
    Acquisition :The obtaining of a controlling interest in a company
    Secured Transaction : A transaction intended to create a security interest in

       personal property or fixtures of a property
    Security: A financial asset, such as a mortgage, provided to make certain

       that a debt obligation is fulfilled.

                                                             129
Managing a business

There are many laws that concern managing a business because there are many
aspects involved in managing. As you can already see, running a business will
involve a lot of employment law and contract law. For my new business, I'll need
to know how to hire, what my contracts should look like, what kind of benefits I
have to provide, how to pay employee insurance and taxes and even how to
properly fire an employee. Many of these employment and benefit laws are
federal laws and regulated by government agencies. For example, the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission is a federal agency that enforces
employment discrimination laws.

If I also decide to sell things as part of my pet grooming business, like dog collars
or dog treats, then I'll need to be familiar with the laws on sales. For businesses
that conduct sales, it's especially helpful to be familiar with the Uniform
Commercial Code, or UCC. This publication governs sales and commercial paper
and has been adopted in some form by almost all states. What happens if I provide
services but have trouble getting paid? Let's say I groom several dogs for Victor's
Vet, but he won't pay my bill. Can I demand payment or report him to the credit
reporting agencies? This is a debt collection law question. Debt collection laws
are mostly federal laws. For instance, many of our debt collection laws are found
in the Fair Debt Collection Practices Act, or the FDCPA, which is enforced by the
Federal Trade Commission.

What happens if Victor just didn't like my services? Let's say Victor accuses me of
purposely sabotaging his chances at a national dog show by giving his poodle a
bad haircut. Can Victor sue me? And, if so, will his lawsuit be against me
personally, or will it be against my Barks & Bubbles business entity? This scenario
falls under law of tort. Torts are private, civil actions for wrongful deeds. Tort law
is usually state law. This is an extensive area of the law and includes things like
work injuries and negligence claims.

Other Considerations When Hiring a Business and Commercial Lawyer

Each industry faces its own unique business and commercial law issues. An
attorney with experience in the type of business that your company conducts will
be able to give you more practical advice and help you find a solution to your legal
issue that also takes business ethics and industry practices into consideration.

                                                             130
Many business owners and managers only hire an attorney when it is too late for
the attorney to be much help. Business owners often try to negotiate sales of goods
on their own without known the legal requirements under their state`s version of
the UCC. This can lead canceled contracts, lost profits, and even legal penalties if
the other party decides to sue. Instead of trying to navigate the law on their own,
business owners should consult a commercial law attorney early in the contract
negotiation process to ensure that their legal rights are protected.

Law of agency

The law of agency is an area of commercial law dealing with a set of contractual,
quasi-contractual and non-contractual fiduciary relationships that involve a person,
called the agent, that is authorized to act on behalf of another called the principal
to create legal relations with a third party. Succinctly, it may be referred to as the
equal relationship between a principal and an agent whereby the principal,
expressly or implicitly, authorizes the agent to work under his or her control and on
his or her behalf. The agent is, thus, required to negotiate on behalf of the principal
or bring him or her and third parties into contractual relationship. This branch of
law separates and regulates the relationships between agents and principals internal
relationship, known as the principal-agent relationship; agents and the third parties
with whom they deal on their principals' behalf external relationship; and
principals and the third parties when the agents deal.

In India, section 182 of the Contract Act 1872 defines Agent as a person employed
to do any act for another or to represent another in dealings with third persons,The
reciprocal rights and liabilities between a principal and an agent reflect commercial
and legal realities. A business owner often relies on an employee or another person
to conduct a business. In the case of a corporation, since a corporation is a
fictitious legal person, it can only act through human agents. The principal is
bound by the contract entered into by the agent, so long as the agent performs
within the scope of the agency.

A third party may rely in good faith on the representation by a person who
identifies himself as an agent for another. It is not always cost effective to check
whether someone who is represented as having the authority to act for another
actually has such authority. If it is subsequently found that the alleged agent was
acting without necessary authority, the agent will generally be held liable.

Legal principles of Agency relationship

                                                             131
   1. Universal agents hold broad authority to act on behalf of the principal, e.g.
       they may hold a power of attorneyalso known as a mandate in civil
       lawjurisdictions or have a professional relationship, say, as lawyer and
       client.

   2. General agents hold a more limited authority to conduct a series of
       transactions over a continuous period of time; and

   3. Special agents are authorized to conduct either only a single transaction or a
       specified series of transactions over a limited period of time.

   An agent who acts within the scope of authority conferred by his or her
   principal binds the principal in the obligations he or she creates against third
   parties. There are essentially three kinds of authority recognized in the law:
   actual authority (whether express or implied), apparent authority, and ratified
   authority.

Actual authority

Actual authority can be of two kinds. Either the principal may have expressly
conferred authority on the agent, or authority may be implied. Authority arises by
consensual agreement, and whether it exists is a question of fact. An agent, as a
general rule, is only entitled to indemnity from the principal if he or she has acted
within the scope of her actual authority, and may be in breach of contract, and
liable to a third party for breach of the implied warranty of authority. In tort, a
claimant may not recover from the principal unless the agent is acting within the
scope of employment.

Express actual authority

Express actual authority means an agent has been expressly told he or she may act
on behalf of a principal.

Implied actual authority

Implied actual authority, also called "usual authority", is authority an agent has by
virtue of being reasonably necessary to carry out his express authority. As such, it
can be inferred by virtue of a position held by an agent. For example, partners have
authority to bind the other partners in the firm, their liability being joint and
several, and in a corporation, all executives and senior employees with decision-
making authority by virtue of their position have authority to bind the corporation.
Other forms of implied actual authority include customary authority. This is where

                                                             132
customs of a trade imply the agent to have certain powers. Wool buying industries
it is customary for traders to purchase in their own names. Also incidental
authority, where an agent is supposed to have any authority to complete other task
which is necessary and incidental to completing the express actual authority. This
must be no more than necessary.

Apparent authority

Apparent authority also called ostensible authority exists where the principal's
words or conduct would lead a reasonable person in the third party's position to
believe that the agent was authorized to act, even if the principal and the purported
agent had never discussed such a relationship. For example, where one person
appoints a person to a position which carries with it agency-like powers, those who
know of the appointment are entitled to assume that there is apparent authority to
do the things ordinarily entrusted to one occupying such a position. If a principal
creates the impression that an agent is authorized but there is no actual authority,
third parties are protected so long as they have acted reasonably. This is sometimes
termed agency by estoppel" or the doctrine of holding out, where the principal will
be estopped from denying the grant of authority if third parties have changed their
positions to their detriment in reliance on the representations made.

Rama Corporation Ltd v Proved Tin and General Investments Ltd 1952 2 QB 147,
Slade J, Ostensible or apparent authority... is merely a form of estoppel, indeed, it
has been termed agency by estoppel and you cannot call in aid an estoppel unless
you have three ingredients:

    (i) a representation, ii reliance on the representation, and (iii) an alteration of
   your position resulting from such reliance."Watteau v Fenwick in the UK

Liability of agent to third party

If the agent has actual or apparent authority, the agent will not be liable for acts
performed within the scope of such authority, so long as the relationship of the
agency and the identity of the principal have been disclosed. When the agency is
undisclosed or partially disclosed, however, both the agent and the principal are
liable. Where the principal is not bound because the agent has no actual or apparent
authority, the purported agent is liable to the third party for breach of the implied
warranty of.

                                                             133
Liability of agent to principal

If the agent has acted without actual authority, but the principal is nevertheless
bound because the agent had apparent authority, the agent is liable to indemnify
the principal for any resulting loss or damage.

Liability of principal to agent

If the agent has acted within the scope of the actual authority given, the principal
must indemnify the agent for payments made during the course of the relationship
whether the expenditure was expressly authorized or merely necessary in
promoting the principal's business.

Duties of agent to principal

An agent owes the principal a number of duties. These include: a duty to undertake
the task or tasks specified by the terms of the agency; a duty to discharge his duties
with care and due diligence; An agent must not accept any new obligations that are
inconsistent with the duties owed to the principal. An agent can represent the
interests of more than one principal, conflicting or potentially conflicting, only
after full disclosure and consent of the principal. An agent must not usurp an
opportunity from the principal by taking it for himself or passing it on to a third
party.

In return, the principal must make a full disclosure of all information relevant to
the transactions that the agent is authorized to negotiate.

TERMINATION OF AGENCY

Mutual agreement also through the principal responding his authority. Through
renouncing when agent hm self stop being an agent.when principal revoke.

The internal agency relationship may be dissolved by agreement. Under sections
201 to 210 of the Indian Contract Act 1872, an agency may come to an end in a
variety of ways:

   1. Withdrawal by the agent ­ however, the principal cannot revoke an agency
       coupled with interest to the prejudice of such interest. An agency is coupled
       with interest when the agent himself has an interest in the subject-matter of
       the agency, e.g., where the goods are consigned by an upcountry constituent
       to a commission agent for sale, with poor to recoup himself from the sale

                                                             134
       proceeds, the advances made by him to the principal against the security of
       the goods; in such a case, the principal cannot revoke the agent`s authority
       till the goods are actually sold and debts satisfied, nor is the agency
       terminated by death or insanity.
   2. By the agent renouncing the business of agency;
   3. By discharge of the contractual agency obligations.

Alternatively, agency may be terminated by operation of law:

   1. By the death of either party;
   2. By the insanity of either party;
   3. By the bankruptcy insolvency of either party;

The principal also cannot revoke the agent`s authority after it has been partly
exercised, so as to bind the principal s. 204, though he can always do so, before
such authority has been so exercised s. 203. Further, under s. 205, if the agency is
for a fixed period, the principal cannot terminate the agency before the time
expired, except for sufficient cause. If he does, he is liable to compensate the agent
for the loss caused to him thereby. The same rules apply where the agent,
renounces an agency for a fixed period. Notice in this connection that want of skill,
continuous disobedience of lawful orders, and rude or insulting behavior has been
held to be sufficient cause for dismissal of an agent. Further, reasonable notice has
to be given by one party to the other; otherwise, damage resulting from want of
such notice, will have to be paid s. 206. Under s. 207, the revocation or
renunciation of an agency may be made expressly or implicitly by conduct. The
termination does not take effect as regards the agent, till it becomes known to him
and as regards third party, till the termination is known to them s. 208.When an
agent`s authority is terminated, it operates as a termination of subagent also s. 210

Partnerships and Companies

This has become a more difficult area as states are not consistent on the nature of a
partnership. Some states opt for the partnership as no more than an aggregate of the
natural persons who have joined the firm. Others treat the partnership as a business
entity and, like a corporation, vest the partnership with a separate legal personality.
Hence, for example, in English law, a partner is the agent of the other partners
whereas, in Scots law where there is a separate personality, a partner is the agent of
the partnership. This form of agency is inherent in the status of a partner and does
not arise out of a contract of agency with a principal. The English Partnership Act
1890 provides that a partner who acts within the scope of his actual authority

                                                             135
express or implied will bind the partnership when he does anything in the ordinary
course of carrying on partnership business. Even if that implied authority has been
revoked or limited, the partner will have apparent authority unless the third party
knows that the authority has been compromised. Hence, if the partnership wishes
to limit any partner's authority, it must give express notice of the limitation to the
world. However, there would be little substantive difference if English law was
amended:[10] partners will bind the partnership rather than their fellow partners
individually. For these purposes, the knowledge of the partner acting will be
imputed to the other partners or the firm if a separate personality. The other
partners or the firm are the principal and third parties are entitled to assume that the
principal has been informed of all relevant information. This causes problems
when one partner acts fraudulently or negligently and causes loss to clients of the
firm. In most states, a distinction is drawn between knowledge of the firm's general
business activities and the confidential affairs as they affect one client. Thus, there
is no imputation if the partner is acting against the interests of the firm as a fraud.
There is more likely to be liability in tort if the partnership benefited by receiving
fee income for the work negligently performed, even if only as an aspect of the
standard provisions of vicarious liability. Whether the injured party wishes to sue
the partnership or the individual partners is usually a matter for the plaintiff since,
in most jurisdictions, their liability is joint and several.

An agent in commercial lawalso referred to as a manager, is a person who is
authorized to act on behalf of another called the principal or client to create a legal
relationship with a third party. Real estate transactions refer to real estate
brokerage, and mortgage brokerage. In real estate brokerage, the buyers or sellers
are the principals themselves and the broker or his salesperson who represents each
principal is his agent.

4.0 SUMMARY

The principal and agent theory emerged in the 1970s from the combined
disciplines of economics and institutional theory. There is some contention as to
who originated the theory, with theorists Stephen Ross and Barry Mitnick claiming
its authorship. Ross is said to have originally described the dilemma in terms of a
person choosing a flavor of ice-cream for someone whose tastes he does not know.
The most cited reference to the theory, however, comes from Michael C. Jensen
and William Meckling. The theory has come to extend well beyond economics or
institutional studies to all contexts of information asymmetry, uncertainty and risk.
In the context of law, principals do not know enough about whether or to what
extent a contract has been satisfied, and they end up with agency costs. The

                                                             136
solution to this information problem closely related to the moral hazard problem is
to ensure the provision of appropriate incentives so agents act in the way principals
wish.

In terms of game theory, it involves changing the rules of the game so that the self-
interested rational choices of the agent coincide with what the principal desires.
Even in the limited arena of employment contracts, the difficulty of doing this in
practice is reflected in a multitude of compensation mechanisms and supervisory
schemes, as well as in critique of such mechanisms as e.g., Deming, 1986
expresses in his Seven Deadly Diseases of management.

5.0 CONCLUSION

Mutual agreement also through the principal responding his authority. Through
renouncing when agent hm self stop being an agent.when principal revoke. The
internal agency relationship may be dissolved by agreement. Under sections 201 to
210 of the Indian Contract Act 1872, an agency may come to an end in a variety of
ways:

   1. Withdrawal by the agent ­ however, the principal cannot revoke an agency
       coupled with interest to the prejudice of such interest. An agency is coupled
       with interest when the agent himself has an interest in the subject-matter of
       the agency, e.g., where the goods are consigned by an upcountry constituent
       to a commission agent for sale, with poor to recoup himself from the sale
       proceeds, the advances made by him to the principal against the security of
       the goods; in such a case, the principal cannot revoke the agent`s authority
       till the goods are actually sold and debts satisfied, nor is the agency
       terminated by death or insanity;

   2. By the agent renouncing the business of agency;
   3. By discharge of the contractual agency obligations.

Alternatively, agency may be terminated by operation of law:

   1. By the death of either party;
   2. By the insanity of either party;
   3. By the bankruptcy (insolvency) of either party;

The principal also cannot revoke the agent`s authority after it has been partly
exercised, so as to bind the principal, though he can always do so, before such
authority has been so exercised. Further, if the agency is for a fixed period, the
principal cannot terminate the agency before the time expired, except for sufficient

                                                             137
cause. If he does, he is liable to compensate the agent for the loss caused to him
thereby. The same rules apply where the agent, renounces an agency for a fixed
period. Notice in this connection that want of skill, continuous disobedience of
lawful orders, and rude or insulting behavior has been held to be sufficient cause
for dismissal of an agent. Further, reasonable notice has to be given by one party to
the other; otherwise, damage resulting from want of such notice, will have to be
paid. Under s. 207, the revocation or renunciation of an agency may be made
expressly or implicitly by conduct. The termination does not take effect as regards
the agent, till it becomes known to him and as regards third party, till the
termination is known to them.

6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Discuss the relationship of principal and agent. What the obligation of each to the
other.

7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READING

   Eisenhardt, K.M.. (1989). Agency Theory: An Assessment and Review. The
Academy of Management Review, 14(1), 57­74. Retrieved from
http://www.jstor.org/stable/258191

   "Agency Costs". Investopedia.

   Pay Without Performance by Lucian Bebchuk and Jesse Fried, Harvard
University Press 2004 (preface and introduction)

   Mitnick (2006) "The Origins of Agency Theory":
http://www.pitt.edu/~mitnick/agencytheory/agencytheoryoriginrev11806r.htm

   Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling. 1976. Theory of the firm:
Managerial behavior, agency costs and ownership structure. Journal of Financial
Economics (October), 3(4): 305­360.
http://www.sfu.ca/~wainwrig/Econ400/jensen-meckling.pdf

                                                             138
   Pendergast, Canice (1999). "The Provision of Incentives in Firms". Journal of
Economic Literature. 37: 7­63. JSTOR 2564725. doi:10.1257/jel.37.1.7.

     Paula Szuchman, Jenny Anderson. It's Not You, It's the Dishes (originally
published as Spousonomics): How to Minimize Conflict and Maximize Happiness
in Your Relationship. Random House Digital, Inc., June 12, 2012. Page 210.
Accessed on May 31, 2013

Unit 4 : COOPERATIVE LAW

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Law on Cooperatives was adopted in May 1988 to offer greater clarity about
the direction of private economic activity during the early period of perestroika.
This was necessitated by the fact that the earlier Law on Individual Labor Activity,
which went into effect in May 1987 as the first step toward creating a legal private
sector, was ambiguous as well as limited in its provisions for privatization. Private
economic activity, embodied in organizations called "cooperatives," quickly
evolved beyond the provisions of the 1987 Law, and the new Law was intended to
reflect the reality of the growing cooperative movement.

In general, the Law liberalized the way in which cooperatives operated. The legal
basis for private enterprise was changed, and cooperatives were accorded the status
of "basic units" in the economy and were thus placed on an equal footing with state
enterprises. No longer was the size of a cooperative or the amount of its assets
limited. Cooperatives could now engage in any economic activity, except for those
prohibited by law. Financial arrangements also moved in a new direction. Shares in
a business could be issued. There was no limit on income, the size of which could
be based either on one's financial contribution to the cooperative or on the amount
of work one performed there. Cooperatives still had to be registered by local
authorities, but these administrative organs no longer had the right of approval or
disapproval of its activities. Cooperatives were made formally independent of the
state sector, and the latter was forbidden to give compulsory state orders to
cooperatives. Cooperatives were given the right to form joint ventures with foreign
companies. In essence, the Law made cooperatives indistinguishable from
capitalist enterprises.

                                                             139
2.0 OBJECTIVE:

At the end of the units you shoud be able to

*The meaning of cooperative law

* The requirements to form cooperative society

*Types of cooperative socirty in Nigeria

3.0 MAINCONTENT

A cooperative in its simplest sense is formed when individuals organize together
around a common, usually economic, goal. For business purposes, a cooperative
refers to the creation of a nonprofit enterprise for the benefit of those individuals
using its services. According to the National Association of Business Cooperatives,
roughly 100 million Americans belong to one of the 47,000 existing cooperatives.
Of these cooperatives, 10,500 credit unions make up the largest segment. Other
types of goods and services that can be provided by working under cooperative
principles include agricultural products, utilities, child care/preschools, insurance,
health care, legal services, food, equipment, and employment services,

The Law on Cooperatives was a major economic reform implemented in the Union
of Soviet Socialist Republics during General Secretary Mikhail
Gorbachev'sperestroika and glasnost reforms. It was implemented in May of 1988,
allowed for independent worker-owned cooperatives to operate in the Soviet
Union, as opposed to just state-owned enterprises, and gave guidelines as to how
these cooperatives should be managed. While originally the law imposed high
taxes and restrictions on employment, it was eventually revised so as not to
discourage activity within the private sector The modern cooperative dates back to
1844, when the Rochdale Equitable Pioneers Society was established in Great
Britain. According to the National Rural Electric Collective Association, the
Rochdale Principles are still followed by every cooperative business. First is the
principle of a voluntary and open membership. Cooperatives are open to all
individuals who are able to use their services and are willing to accept the
responsibilities of membership.

                                                             140
The next principle is that of a democratic organization, operated by its members.
The board of directors is comprised of members and is accountable to them.
Members actively participate in the co-op by developing policy and making
decisions. In a primary cooperative, each member has one vote. Other cooperatives
are organized in a different but democratic manner. Members also contribute
equally to the economic capital of the cooperative. Part, if not all, of the capital
becomes the common property of the collective. Surpluses can be used for
development of the organization, as reserves, to benefit members according to their
use of or contributions to the cooperative, or to support other member-approved
works.

A cooperative is autonomous and independent from other organizations. If it enters
into a working relationship with another organization, the arrangement must ensure
the democratic control of its members and maintain the independence of the
organization. Cooperatives provide training and education to members and
employees of the organization in order for them to contribute effectively to the
cooperative. They also provide information on the benefits of cooperation to the
public. Cooperatives work with other cooperatives in order to strengthen the
cooperative movement locally and abroad. Although cooperatives exist for the
benefit of their members, they work towards the sustainable development of their
communities in accordance with membership policies.

The basic operating principles used by cooperatives are simple. The member-
owners share equally in the control of their cooperative. They meet on a regular
basis, monitor the business closely using a variety of tools, and elect a board of
directors from among themselves. The board in turn hires managers to oversee the
daily affairs of the cooperative in a way that serves the members' interests. The
initial capital for a cooperative comes from membership investment. After the
cooperative's costs are covered and money is designated for operations and
improvements to the cooperative, the remaining surplus or profit in a for-profit
enterprise is returned to the membership. For a small business, membership in a
cooperative may provide greater purchasing power or access to a wider distribution
of goods or services than the business would have on its own.

A related concept is that of a collective. A collective is comprised of a group of
individuals pooling together their intellectual and financial resources in order to
operate a business enterprise for their mutual benefit. Frequently, members have no
specific job but rather contribute to projects if they have free time or specific
strengths to add to a job. Members of the collective share equally in any monies
left over after paying bills. This alternative method of working has lately found

                                                             141
favor with creative businesses such as advertising and design groups. Collectives
may remain intact or be of a more fluid nature with members joining and dropping
out regularly.

The nature of cooperative society

The nature and functions of cooperatives differ considerably such as purchasing
cooperatives, consumer cooperatives, and marketing cooperatives. In the context of
agriculture, a farmers' cooperative refers to an organization of farmers residing in
the same locale that is established for their mutual benefit in regard to the
cultivation and harvest of their products, the purchase of farm equipment and
supplies at the lowest possible cost, and the sale of their products at the maximum
possible price.

The term cooperative also signifies the ownership of an apartment building by a
nonprofit corporation that holds title to it and the property upon which it is
situated. Stock in the corporation is allotted among the apartment units on the basis
of their relative value or size. The right of occupancy to a particular apartment is
granted to each cooperative member, who purchases the shares assigned to the
desired unit. The member subsequently receives a long-term proprietary lease to
that unit. The rent payable pursuant to the lease is that member's proportionate
share of the expenses the corporation incurs in operating the cooperative such as
insurance, taxes, maintenance, management, and debt service. The cooperative
concept evolved in New York City during the early 1900s as a mode of
accommodating the public's desire for home ownership; it subsequently expanded
to other large urban centers.

In order to finance the purchase or construction of the cooperative building, the
cooperative places a blanket mortgage on the property, which is pledged to support
the given debt. Lenders usually are hesitant to accept an individual member's stock
and proprietary lease as security for a long-term loan. The members' lien a claim
on property to satisfy a debt on the lease would be subordinate to the blanket
mortgage on the property. The purchaser of a cooperative apartment usually must
have sufficient cash available to pay for the stock allotted to the unit he or she
wishes to obtain. The initial price of the stock generally does not exceed the
amount required for a down payment on a single-family residence. As cooperative
members accumulate Equity the value of property exceeding the total debts on it in
their stock, subsequent purchasers must either have a substantial amount of cash
available or locate a seller who is willing to recoup the equity in installments over
several years.

                                                             142
Cooperative members are also financially dependent on each other. The existence
of a single blanket mortgage paid by rent receipts means that if several members
default in their rent payments, the corporation might not have sufficient funds to
pay a mortgage loan instalment. Foreclosure will ensue in regard to the entire
membership unless it acts to satisfy the default. Although special reserves and
assessments are generally employed to cover such a contingency, the available
funds might be inadequate to prevent default.

The Structure of Cooperative organization

1. General Assembly Election Committee Audit/Supervisory Committee Board of
Directors Management Staff Election and Training Committee Ethics Committee
Mediation & Conciliation Comittee Secretary Treasurer .

Most businesses, such as sole proprietorships, limited liability companies and
corporations, have a hierarchical leadership structure. In contrast, a cooperative
organization has a much more democratic structure. Members of the cooperative
can vote on the group's mission statement, its business methods and even its formal
structure. Some cooperative groups may choose to have a centralized core of
decision makers, while others may take the option of a looser alliance of
individuals or member firms.

Centralized Cooperative Structures

A local cooperative is made up of individual producers who work together to
achieve common goals. Many small family farms and other agricultural companies
form local cooperatives to pool resources and share knowledge. When several local
cooperatives unite under the same offices, the group becomes a federated
cooperative, with a central office overseeing the operations of each member
cooperative. Members of a mixed cooperative can be either individual producers or
member cooperative group.

Subsidiary Cooperative Structures

Not all members of a cooperative organization are either individual producers or
other cooperatives. Some cooperatives employ subsidiary companies to perform
tasks that would normally fall under the central cooperative's office. These
subsidiary companies are either partially or totally owned by the cooperative. For
instance, the parent cooperative may choose to acquire an accounting firm to
perform financial tasks for the entire cooperative, rather than hiring an outside
firm, and include that firm within its existing structure.

                                                             143
Joint Cooperative Ventures

A cooperative organization may choose to work with another cooperative,
commercial firm or individual on a specific project. For the duration of the project,
the other entity does not need to join the cooperative. Instead, these joint ventures
allow the entities to remain separate while working together on a common goal.
This arrangement allows the cooperative to take advantage of the partner's
resources, while it maintains its democratic structure.

New Cooperative Structures

Due to the evolution of agricultural industrialization, many local cooperatives are
taking on new structural models. Many cooperatives are changing from their
original model of mutual benefit to an investor-driven, for-profit model. This
change often involves the conversion of member-owner rights into common stock
shareholder rights. Some organizations in other industries, including the financial,
insurance and professional service arenas, have moved away from the cooperative
model and converted to publicly traded companies to attract investor capital.

Cooperatives are business entities owned by the purchasers of their products and
users of their services. These organizations provide electricity, home and car loans
(credit unions), health care, housing and insurance mutual insurance companies,
sell consumer and farm products and equipment and help producers market their
wares. They also exist locally and nationwide. Cooperatives model their structure
after corporations with most, but not all, choosing to incorporate. However, the
rights and responsibilities of the participants reflect the member-centered nature of
cooperatives.

Membership

Normally, a person joins by buying goods and services rather than investing in the
entity; some cooperatives accept members who purchase stock in the entity.
Members vote for the board of directors; each member gets a single vote, while a
shareholder in a typical corporation gets one vote for each share they own.
Cooperatives pay out profits to the members in the form of patronage, also known
as refunds; the amount is in proportion to his purchases from the cooperative.
When the cooperative dissolves, the members share in the property remaining after
the cooperative pays its creditors.

Directors

                                                             144
The directors oversee the operation of the cooperative. The board sets the
cooperative's policies, which include how people become members of the
cooperative and how money is spent, and decide when members receive patronage
and how much. Directors are responsible for acquiring land, buildings and other
property. They represent the members and must assess their needs and the
cooperative's ability to meet them. Managers and officers are selected by the board
to carry out the strategies and plans of the cooperative.

Officers

As in typical corporations, the board of directors choose officers. The president
presides at meetings of directors and members, oversees the entity`s affairs and is
an intermediary between the board and the professional managers; the vice
president assumes these duties if the president not be available. The secretary
keeps records of the cooperative`s meetings, actions and members and has custody
of the bylaws, which functions as the cooperative`s operating manual. The
treasurer accounts for the entity`s income and outflow of money.

Managers

The board of directors selects a professional manager to carry out its plans and
policies. The manager oversees the cooperative`s daily operations; this includes
hiring, training and supervising employees; assuring adequate inventory for stores
and the proper workings of physical facilities and equipment; and interacting with
new and prospective members. The manager must educate herself on developments
and changes in laws and regulations that affect the cooperative.

The International Cooperative Alliance defines a cooperative also known as co-
operative, co-op, or coop as an autonomous association of persons united
voluntarily to meet their common economic, social, and cultural needs and
aspirations through a jointly-owned and democratically-controlled enterprise.
Cooperatives may include:

    non-profit community organizations
    businesses owned and managed by the people who use their services a

       consumer cooperative
    organisations managed by the people who work there (worker cooperatives
    organisations managed by the people to whom they provide accommodation

       housing cooperatives
    hybrids such as worker cooperatives that are also consumer cooperatives or

       credit unions

                                                             145
    multi-stakeholder cooperatives such as those that bring together civil society
       and local actors to deliver community needs

    second- and third-tier cooperatives whose members are other cooperatives.

TYPES OF COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES IN NIGERIA

In Africa, the first cooperatives appeared at the beginning of the 20th century. It
happened because the colonial administration intended to establish contacts with
the local population through cooperation. The development of cooperative society
in Nigeria has been slow and difficult. This can be explained by the following
factors. The first is that cooperatives were allowed to operate only in the status
approved by the colonial power. Any deviation from the existing order was
impossible. Such cooperatives were short-lived due to their weak material base.

The second, large landowners, tribal chiefs, and community leaders looked towards
the emergence of cooperatives involving the poor. They knew that this kind of
cooperation will spur the organized struggle of the peasants against the exploiters.
These factors explain why, in the colonial period, the idea of cooperation was
spreading very slowly. The first attempts to create different types of cooperative
society in Nigeria were aimed at the peasants. For example, agrarian cooperative
society in the city of Ibadan (1904), the cooperation of growers Agege (1907), and
the Association of farmers, EGBA (1910). These cooperative societies appeared in
the region of cocoa cultivation and regardless of state support.

The sharp economic decline has become a reason for the appearance of the new
types of cooperatives. The idea was to provide financial assistance for the under-
privileged. So that they could afford to buy essential things and get basic needs.
First of all, it should be mentioned that Nigerians can`t meet all their demands. It is
obvious, as the majority of people live at a level less than the federal poverty line.
Everyone understands it is impossible to obtain any property with cash wages of
less than $1 per day. That`s why the community strives to organize different forms
and types of cooperatives in Nigeria.

A cooperative is a private business organization that is owned and controlled by
the people who use its products, supplies or services. Although cooperatives vary
in types and membership size, all were formed to meet the specific objectives of
the members, and are structured to adapt to a member's changing needs.

The sharp economic decline has become a reason for the appearance of the new
types of cooperatives. The idea was to provide financial assistance for the under-
privileged. So that they could afford to buy essential things and get basic needs.

                                                             146
First of all, it should be mentioned that Nigerians can`t meet all their demands. It is
obvious, as the majority of people live at a level less than the federal poverty line.
Everyone understands it is impossible to obtain any property with cash wages of
less than $1 per day. That`s why the community strives to organize different forms
and types of cooperatives in Nigeria.

A cooperative is a private business organization that is owned and controlled by
the people who use its products, supplies or services. Although cooperatives vary
in types and membership size, all were formed to meet the specific objectives of
the members, and are structured to adapt to a member's changing needs.

1.Consumer cooperatives:

Its role is to provide affordable price for goods and services which are essential for
the overwhelming majority of people. It is crucially important in the case of
domestic commodity shortage.

2. Credit cooperatives

Such cooperatives exist for providing savings and loan services to its members.
There are such advantages as: convenient collateral for loans, low-interest rates on
issued loans, high speed of decision-making on granting of the required amount of
money, the minimum difference between interest on deposits and loans.

3.Agricultural/Farmers' cooperatives

In Nigeria, the agricultural sector is the main sphere of production. It involves the
overwhelming mass of the population (about 43% of the working population).
However, the low level of development of productive forces and the predominance
of traditional low-productivity types of farming make this industry the most
deprived in the structure of the national economy.

The ability of the agricultural sector to play its traditional role in the economy of
Nigeria was limited by various socio-economic and structural factors, since
independence in 1960. Some of which included the civil war in the late 60s, a
severe drought in the early 70s and 80s, as well as the discovery of oil deposits.
The oil boom in the 70s created a relative loss of interest in agriculture in
comparison to other sectors of the economy. Nevertheless, oil prices in the 80s fell
to some extent, refreshing the interest in the agricultural sector.

                                                             147
This type of cooperatives is the most popular among Nigerians. World practice
shows that development of agriculture is largely determined by the use of the
benefits of farmers` cooperative society. The development of a system of
agricultural cooperation is the question of social, political, and economic
importance.

4. Housing cooperatives

It is a cooperative where every member can buy a piece of land, take part in
building houses, and make investments on a profitable basis in real estate business.

   4. Fishing cooperatives

These kinds of cooperatives also still exist. They are usually organized for
providing either fresh or processed fish products. There is even a special discount
for its members for buying nets and gears. The fact that the prices are reasonable is
why it is easy to get into this kind of cooperation.

   5. Multipurpose cooperatives

Cooperation has an important role to play in the economic system for the efficient
development of any industry in Nigeria. It best combines the personal, collective,
and public interests. Its role and importance have considerably increased. More
people are paying attention to cooperation, seeing in it the possibility of surviving
despite the difficult economic situation. Potential advantages and disadvantages of
cooperative society in Nigeria are as follows:

- The cooperative movement is able to concentrate the employment, logistical,
financial, and other resources for effective use.

- Due to this cooperation business abilities of the members are increasing: the
social and economic conditions of their lives and the rural population are
improving as a whole.

- Cooperation provides a more sensitive reaction to market fluctuations. However,
in cooperative groups, it is easy to achieve a rational use of local, natural and
economic resources.

Under ideal conditions, the presence of multipurpose cooperative society traditions
is an important part of the successful implementation of the cooperative; goals.
Cooperation, in our opinion, will play a crucial role in promoting the process of

                                                             148
development and togetherness. It also leads us on an important direction of
industrialization of the economy which will aid our developing country.

RESPONSIBILITIES, POWERS AND FUNCTIONS OF BOARD OF
DIRECTORS:

The board of directors of a listed company shall exercise its powers and carry out
its fiduciary duties with a sense of objective judgment and independence in the best
interests of the listed company. The board of directors of a listed company shall
ensure that:

(a) professional standards and corporate values are put in place that promote

integrity for the board, senior management and other employees in the form of a

Code of Conduct, defining therein acceptable and unacceptable behaviors. The

board shall take appropriate steps to disseminate Code of Conduct throughout the

company  along    with            supporting                 policies  and

procedures and these shall be put on the company`s website;

(b) adequate systems and controls are in place for identification and redress of
grievances arising from unethical practices.

(c) a vision and/or mission statement and overall corporate strategy for the listed
company is prepared and adopted. It shall further ensure that significant policies
have been formulated;

A complete record of particulars of the significant policies along with the dates on
which they were approved or amended by the board of directors shall be
maintained.

(d) a system of sound internal control is established, which is effectively
implemented and maintained at all levels within the company;

(e) within two years of coming into force of this Code, a mechanism is put in place
for an annual evaluation of the board`s own performance;

(f) the decisions on the following material transactions or significant matters are
documented by a resolution passed at a meeting of the board:

· investment and disinvestment of funds where the maturity period of such

investments is six months or more, except in the case of banking companies, non-

banking  finance  companies       and         insurance                companies;

                             149
· determination of the nature of loans and advances made by the listed company
and fixing a monetary limit thereof.

(g) the board of directors shall define the level of materiality, keeping in view the
specific circumstances of the company and the recommendations of any technical
or executive subcommittee of the board that may be set up for the purpose.

The legal responsibilities of boards and board members vary with the nature of the
organization, and with the jurisdiction within which it operates. For companies
with publicly trading stock, these responsibilities are typically much more rigorous
and complex than for those of other types.

Typically the board chooses one of its members to be the chairman, who holds

whatever title is specified in the bylaws. The Chairman and the Chief Executive

Officer  (CEO)                                 shall  not

be the same person. The Chairman shall be elected from among the non-executive

directors of the listed company. The Chairman shall be responsible for leadership

of the board and shall ensure that the board plays an effective role in fulfilling all

its responsibilities. The Board of Directors shall clearly define the respective roles

and responsibilities of the Chairman and CEO.

The board of directors, including the general manager or chief executive officer,
has very defined roles and responsibilities within the business organization.
Essentially it is the role of the board of directors to hire the CEO or general
manager of the business and assess the overall direction and strategy of the
business. The CEO or general manager is responsible for hiring all of the other
employees and overseeing the day-to-day operation of the business. Problems
usually arise when these guidelines are not followed. Conflict occurs when the
directors begin to meddle in the day-to-day operation of the business. Conversely,
management is not responsible for the overall policy decisions of the business.

The board of directors selects officers for the board. The major office is the
president or chair of the board. Next there is a vice-president of vice-chair who
serves in the absence of the president. These positions are filled by board members.
Next you usually have a secretary and treasurer or combined secretary/treasurer.
These positions focus on very specific activities and may be filled by electing
someone who is serving on the board of directors or appointing someone who is
not a member of the board of directors. The selection process is often based on
who is willing and who is the most qualified, although seniority may come into
play. Each board may have their own ways of handling those issues.

                150
The seven points below outline the major responsibilities of the board of directors.

1. Recruit, supervise, retain, evaluate and compensate the manager. Recruiting,
supervising, retaining, evaluating and compensating the CEO or general manager
are probably the most important functions of the board of directors. Value-added
business boards need to aggressively search for the best possible candidate for this
position. Actively searching within your industry can lead to the identification of
very capable people. Don`t fall into the trap of hiring someone to manage the
business because he/she is out of work and needs a job. Another major error of
value-added businesses is under-compensating the manager. Managerial
compensation can provide a good financial payoff in terms of attracting top
candidates who will bring financial success to the value-added business.

2. Provide direction for the organization. The board has a strategic function in
providing the vision, mission and goals of the organization. These are often
determined in combination with the CEO or general manager of the business.

3) Establish a policy based governance system. The board has the responsibility of
developing a governance system for the business. The articles of governance
provide a framework but the board develops a series of policies. This refers to the
board as a group and focuses on defining the rules of the group and how it will
function. In a sense, it`s no different than a club. The rules that the board
establishes for the company should be policy based. In other words, the board
develops policies to guide it own actions and the actions of the manager. The
policies should be broad and not rigidly defined as to allow the board and manager
leeway in achieving the goals of the business.

4. Govern the organization and the relationship with the CEO. Another
responsibility of the board is to develop a governance system. The governance
system involves how the board interacts with the general manager or CEO.
Periodically the board interacts with the CEO during meetings of the board of
directors. Typically that is done with a monthly board meeting, although some
boards have switched to meetings three to four times a year, or maybe eight times a
year. In the interim between these meetings, the board is kept informed through
phone conferences or postal mail.

5. Fiduciary duty to protect the organization`s assets and member`s investment.
The board has a fiduciary responsibility to represent and protect the
member`s/investor`s interest in the company. So the board has to make sure the
assets of the company are kept in good order. This includes the company`s plant,

                                                             151
equipment and facilities, including the human capital people who work for the
company.

6. Monitor and control function. The board of directors has a monitoring and
control function. The board is in charge of the auditing process and hires the
auditor. It is in charge of making sure the audit is done in a timely manner each
year.

An annual general meeting, also known as the annual meeting is a meeting of the
general membership of an organization. These organizations include membership
associations and companies with shareholders. These meetings may be required by
law or by the constitution, charter, or by-laws governing the body. The meetings
are held to conduct business on behalf of the organization or company. An
organization may conduct its business at the annual general meeting. The business
may include electing a board of directors, making important decisions regarding
the organization, and informing the members of previous and future activities.At
this meeting, the shareholders and partners may receive copies of the company's
accounts, review fiscal information for the past year, and ask any questions
regarding the directions the business will take in the future.

At the annual general meeting, the president or chairman of the organization
presides over the meeting and may give an overall status of the organization.The
secretary prepares the minutes and may be asked to read important papers. The
treasurer may present a financial report. Other officers, the board of directors, and
committees may give their reports. Attending this meeting are the members or the
shareholders of the organization, depending on the type of organization.

Working or acting together willingly for a common purpose or benefit.
demonstrating a willingness to cooperate : The librarian was cooperative in
helping us find the book. pertaining to economic cooperation : a cooperative
business. involving or denoting an educational program comprising both classroom
study and on-the-job or technical training, especially in colleges and universities. a
jointly owned enterprise engaging in the production or distribution of goods or the
supplying of services, operated by its members for their mutual benefit, typically
organized by consumers or farmers. a building owned and managed by a
corporation in which shares are sold, entitling the shareholders to occupy
individual units in the building. an apartment in such a building.

                                                             152
A sole proprietorship is easy to form and gives you complete control of your
business. You're automatically considered to be a sole proprietorship if you do
business activities but don't register as any other kind of business. Sole
proprietorships do not produce a separate business entity. This means your
business assets and liabilities are not separate from your personal assets and
liabilities. You can be held personally liable for the debts and obligations of the
business. Sole proprietors are still able to get a trade name. It can also be hard to
raise money because you can't sell stock, and banks are hesitant to lend to sole
proprietorships. Sole proprietorships can be a good choice for low-risk businesses
and owners who want to test their business idea before forming a more formal
business

Partnerships are the simplest structure for two or more people to own a business
together. There are two common kinds of partnerships: limited partnerships and
limited liability partnerships. Limited partnerships have only one general partner
with unlimited liability, and all other partners have limited liability. The partners
with limited liability also tend to have limited control over the company, which is
documented in a partnership agreement. Profits are passed through to personal tax
returns, and the general partner the partner without limited liability must also pay
self-employment taxes.

Limited liability partnerships are similar to limited partnerships, but give limited
liability to every owner. An LLP protects each partner from debts against the
partnership, they won't be responsible for the actions of other
partners. Partnerships can be a good choice for businesses with multiple owners,
professional groups like attorneys, and groups who want to test their business idea
before forming a more formal business.

An LLC lets you take advantage of the benefits of both the corporation and
partnership business structures. LLCs protect you from personal liability in most
instances, your personal assets -- like your vehicle, house, and savings accounts
won't be at risk in case your LLC faces bankruptcy or lawsuits.

Co-operatives are businesses owned and run by and for their members. Whether
the members are the customers, employees or residents they have an equal say in
what the business does and a share in the profits. As businesses driven by values
not just profit, co-operatives share internationally agreed principles and act
together to build a better world through co-operation. The International Co-
operative Alliance is an independent, non-governmental organisation established in

                                                             153
1895 to unite, represent and serve co-operatives worldwide. The Alliance provides
a global voice and forum for knowledge, expertise and co-ordinated action for and
about co-operatives. In 1995, the Alliance adopted the revised Statement on the
Co-operative Identity which contains the definition of a co-operative, the values of
co-operatives, and the seven co-operative principles as described below. co-
operatives are based on the values of self-help, self-responsibility, democracy,
equality, equity and solidarity. In the tradition of their founders, co-operative
members believe in the ethical values of honesty, openness, social responsibility
and caring for others.

FORMATION OF COOPERATIVE SOCIETY

According to Section 5 of the law, a cooperative society that is Subject to
provisions of this law, and has as its objects of promotion, the economic interests
of its members in accordance with cooperative principles, or a society established
for the purpose of facilitating the operations of such societies may be registered
under this law with or without Limited Liability.

Understanding how to register a Cooperative Society is a step in the right direction,
especially when you consider that a lot of people have lost their life savings and
cash by having business dealings with companies or organisations that are not
recognized by law.

A registered cooperative society is a society with its main objects as promotion of
economic and social interests of its members by means of common undertaking. A
cooperative society operates basing on mutual aid and conforms to cooperative
principles; it is established for the purpose of facilitating operations of societies.

In Nigeria, the Cooperative Societies Act provides direction on how cooperatives
should be set up and run. These laws are made by the government through the
minister responsible for cooperatives. All cooperative societies in Nigeria are
registered, with or without limited liability, according to the cooperative society act
and related rules. Registration, implementation and enforcement of the act and
relate rules is done by a government appointed officer referred to as the Registrar
of cooperative societies.

1.Coordinate people to form up a cooperative society. The start-up cooperative
members must be at least enough to form a Society Board in a full cooperative;
they should therefore not be less than five people;

                                                             154
2.Thereafter, applicants should write a letter to the Province Cooperative Officer
(PCO) requesting to be registered as a pre-cooperative society indicating their
intention to do so;

3.The members should then arrange for meeting that must be chaired by the
Provincial Cooperative Officer (DCO). The meeting is set in order for cooperative
members to elect a Formation Board with a Chairman and a Secretary;

4.After election, the Formation Board should decide on the type of society to be
formed, prepare by-laws for the society and assess founder members` level of
business; look in to the future and estimate number of future members and levels
of business to be done by the society in future; carryout a feasibility study and
prepare feasibility report; record details of founder members, their share capital
and contributions also record details of prospective members, their probable share
capital and contributions. at commencement, the formation board should begin to
keep accounts to allow periodic assessment of the group`s activities; and must
appoint a delegate in charge of representing the group in all civil matters

5. When above are completed, members of a group must make an application to
the Registrar`s representative in the area where the society shall operate. The
Registrar`s representative may be the District Cooperative Officer at District level
or the Assistant Registrar at Regional level.

6.The submitted documents shall then be assessed;

7.After assessment, if the registrar is satisfied, he / she issues a letter of recognition
which will all the group to operate as a per-cooperative society for three (3) years.

8.During the given three (3) years members of the formed pre-cooperative society
must be working hard to fulfill the conditions required to become a full cooperative
society. When all requirements are fulfilled at the end of the three years, the
society shall then be registered as a full cooperative society however, if at the end
of the three (3) years the pre-cooperative society has not fulfilled the conditions,
the letter of recognition will be cancelled.

9.Upon full registration, the registration then issues a Registration Certificate and a
Certified Copy of By- laws

                                                             155
LAGOS AND THE BENEFITS OF COOPERATIVE SOCIETIES

According to the International Co-operative Alliance (ICA), a cooperative society
is an association of people that come together to pool resources together to engage
in business or economic activities for the purpose of improving their welfare. The
cooperative movement began in Europe in the 19th century, primarily in Britain
and France. Robert Owen (1771­1858), a Welshman who made his fortune in the
cotton trade, is considered as the father of the cooperative movement.
In Nigeria, the history of cooperative movement dates back to the 1930s. The most
prevalent of such institution is the credit organization known in English as the
Contribution Society`` but which, according to variations in language, has diverse
terms such as Adashi` Esusu` or Ajo` and Isusu`.

In 1935, the Nigeria cooperative society ordinance was enacted via the
recommendation of Mr. C. F. Strickland which was fashioned out of the India
cooperation society`s Act of 1912. The ordinance provided for recognition of
cooperative as a separate business enterprise, prohibition of the indiscriminate use
of the title cooperative`` and appointment of a registrar of cooperative to control
and administer cooperative laws and fostering of cooperative development.
Without gainsaying, cooperatives are the forerunners of modern sustainability as
displayed in their age-long principles. Cooperative enterprises have made positive
contributions to sustainability through their ability to utilize the dynamics of
human and natural resources within a given community for the benefit of such
community and beyond.

Over the years, cooperative societies have clearly demonstrated that they are key
actors to redefine the sustainable development models prioritizing social equity.
The cooperative formula is seen as a solution that is not only durable but
contemporary, resilient and relevant, and therefore significant in establishing a
more solid economic development through their ethic economy, defense of the
collective interest and the democratization of the entrepreneurial sector.

Cooperatives have a proven record of creating and sustaining employment also
they help to improve the living and working conditions of women and men
globally, make essential infrastructure and services available even in areas
neglected by the state and by investor-driven enterprises.

Cooperative societies help members to develop a savings culture. Nobody can
escape poverty without a savings habit. Anyone that spends everything on
consumption is just a step away from poverty. Saving is made relatively easy with

                                                             156
cooperatives because every member must contribute regularly without default. In
most private and public organisations, such contribution is usually deducted
directly from members` income. So, irrespective of their needs, they are made to
save as an obligation.

Cooperatives also offer members access to loans either in cash or in the form of
goods. As it is difficult for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle, so it is for
the average individual to get loan from banks. For low income earners, it is even
worse, because they don`t have collateral. Even for those that can meet the
conditions for bank loans, the loan may not come promptly as needed. But as a
member of a cooperative, loan can be accessed promptly as your contributions
serve as collateral while fellow contributors are accepted as guarantors. Also, the
interest rate and repayment terms are not crushing as that of the banks. This easy
access to loans has helped many people achieve improved welfare.

In many countries, political, economic and social changes have put pressure on
governments to limit their involvement in economic and social affairs. The core
idea of structural adjustment programs is a shift from public to private initiative,
financing, management and responsibility.

The cooperative model of joint ownership and management is, therefore,
increasingly being used by employees to buy out their own enterprises in the
transport, service and manufacturing sectors, as a means of protecting and
generating jobs in an era of continued downsizing resulting from globalization and
technological changes.

It is in order to draw wider attention to the immeasurable benefits of cooperatives
that the International Cooperative Day is observed on the first Saturday of July
every year as established by the International Cooperative Alliance (ICA) and
embraced by the United Nations (UN). The International Day aims to strengthen
and extend partnerships between the International Co-operative Movement and
other actors, including governments, at local, national and international levels.

In Lagos State, the number of registered Cooperative Societies has grown from one
hundred and eight (108) from 1967 to well over fifteen thousand (15,000) with a
net asset of N70, 731,066,384.90k (Seventy billion, seven hundred and thirty-one
million, sixty-six thousand, three hundred and eighty-four naira and ninety kobo)
according to the mid-year report of the Cooperative Department for year 2016.
Aside this impressive financial profile, the Cooperative Movement in Lagos has
been consistently supporting the state government`s policies and programmes in

                                                             157
the areas of public transportation, job creation, housing and infrastructure
provision.

In reciprocating these contributions, the state government has continued to provide
the enabling environment for profitable investment of cooperative funds. The
Cooperative Arbitration Panel and other advisory units of government have also
been providing succor and financial security to the Cooperative Movement in this
regard. One of the major reasons why the State Government established the State
Cooperative College at Oko-Oba, Agege is to encourage the act of cooperation and
increase the knowledge and skill of cooperative toward reducing fraud and conflict
within Cooperative Societies in Lagos State. The College has trained over 5,516
cooperators in the last four year.

However, though lots of people have heard about cooperatives, it is just a few that
are actually exploring the enormous opportunities they present. Even governments
at all levels are yet to really comprehended how useful cooperative societies can
be, particularly in stamping out poverty and improving welfare of the citizens.
When wholly utilized, cooperatives can boost job creation as well as national
productivity.

In our clime, cooperative societies remain one of the most potent channels of
investment accessible to salary earners and other low income earners. As various
homes contend with the reality of our nation`s dwindling economic fortune, now is
the time for Nigerians to avail themselves of the immense benefits of cooperatives.

5.0 SUMMARY

To register a cooperative, it is necessary to prepare a package of documents,
including:

Protocol on the creation of a cooperative, a list of its members, management
bodies, and statutes;

A copy of the passport and tax number of the head, officials and / or founders of
the cooperative;

If the founder is a legal entity, then additional documents will be required to
confirm the eligibility of the authorized founder members to sign the necessary
documents. For example, the decision of the general meeting on the establishment
of a cooperative legal entity, a copy of the charter, the order to appoint a director of
a legal entity. Specification of the necessary documents will be determined by the

                                                             158
specialists in each case. The registration algorithm of a cooperative is identical to
the registration procedure of enterprises - documents can be submitted in paper or
electronic form, they are compiled in the state language. The decision to register a
cooperative is made within 24 hours after receiving the documents, excluding
weekends and holidays.

Non-profitable status can be obtained by all cooperatives, if: activity is not for the
sake of profit; the charter of the cooperative contains a ban on the distribution of
benefits between the founders; provision is made for the transfer of cooperative
assets to another cooperative in case of liquidation.

5.0 CONCLUSION

A society is a group of people involved in persistent social interaction, or a large
social group sharing the same geographical or social territory, typically subject to
the same political authority and dominant cultural expectations. Societies are
characterized by patterns of relationships social relations between individuals who
share a distinctive culture and institutions; a given society may be described as the
sum total of such relationships among its constituent of members. In the social
sciences, a larger society often evinces stratification or dominance patterns in
subgroups.

Insofar as it is collaborative, a society can enable its members to benefit in ways
that would not otherwise be possible on an individual basis; both individual and
social (common) benefits can thus be distinguished, or in many cases found to
overlap. A society can also consist of like-minded people governed by their own
norms and values within a dominant, larger society. This is sometimes referred to
as a subculture, a term used extensively within criminology. More broadly, and
especially within structuralist thought, a society may be illustrated as an economic,
social, industrial or cultural infrastructure, made up of, yet distinct from, a varied
collection of individuals. In this regard society can mean the objective
relationships people have with the material world and with other people, rather
than "other people" beyond the individual and their familiar social environment.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:

1. Explain a cooperative society and the organization structure of a cooperative
society.

                                                             159
2. What the role of government in cooperative societies in Nigeria?
3. Define cooperative societies and various types of society in Nigeria and explain
the role of government to cooperative societies.
7.0 REFERENCES/ FURTHER READINGS

   http://soviethistory.msu.edu/1985-2/cooperatives/cooperatives-texts/law-on-
cooperatives/

   Pike, John (7 September 2011). "Perestroika". GlobalSecurity.org. Retrieved 17
March 2015.

UNIT 6: LAW OF TORTS
1.0 INTRODUCTION
A body of rights, obligations, and remedies that is applied by courts in civil
proceedings to provide relief for persons who have suffered harm from the
wrongful acts of others. The person who sustains injury or suffers pecuniary
damage as the result of tortious conduct is known as the plaintiff, and the person
who is responsible for inflicting the injury and incurs liability for the damage is
known as the defendant or tortfeasor.
Three elements must be established in every tort action. First, the plaintiff must
establish that the defendant was under a legal duty to act in a particular fashion.
Second, the plaintiff must demonstrate that the defendant breached this duty by
failing to conform his or her behavior accordingly. Third, the plaintiff must prove
that he suffered injury or loss as a direct result of the defendant's breach.
The law of torts is derived from a combination of common-law principles and
legislative enactments. Unlike actions for breach of contract, tort actions are not
dependent upon an agreement between the parties to a lawsuit. Unlike criminal

                                                             160
prosecutions, which are brought by the government, tort actions are brought by
private citizens. Remedies for tortious acts include money damages and injunctions
(court orders compelling or forbidding particular conduct). Tortfeasors are subject
to neither fine nor incarceration in civil court.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

At the end of the units you should be able

*know what tort under the law

*know intentional and unintentional tort

*Various damages a tortfeasor can pay to a victim

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Tort law refers to the set of laws that provides remedies to individuals who have
suffered harm by the unreasonable acts of another. Tort law is based on the idea
that people are liable for the consequences of their actions, whether intentional or
accidental, if they cause harm to another person or entity. Torts are the civil
wrongs that form the basis of civil lawsuits. To explore this concept, consider the
following tort law definition.

A tort, in common law jurisdictions, is a civil wrong that unfairly causes someone
else to suffer loss or harm resulting in legal liability for the person who commits
the tortious act.The person who commits the act is called a tortfeasor. Although
crimes may be torts, the cause of legal action is not necessarily a crime, as the
harm may be due to negligence which does not amount to criminal negligence. The
victim of the harm can recover their loss as damages in a lawsuit. In order to
prevail, the plaintiff in the lawsuit, commonly referred to as the injured party,
must show that the actions or lack of action was the legally recognizable cause of
the harm. The equivalent of tort in civil law jurisdictions is delict.

Legal injuries are not limited to physical injuries and may include emotional,
economic, or reputational injuries as well as violations of privacy, property, or
constitutional rights. Torts comprise such varied topics as auto accidents, false
imprisonment, defamation, product liability, copyright infringement, and
environmental pollution toxic torts. While many torts are the result of negligence,
tort law also recognizes intentional torts, where a person has intentionally acted in
a way that harms another, and in a few cases particularly for product liability in the

                                                             161
United States strict liability which allows recovery without the need to demonstrate
negligence.

Tort law is different from criminal law in that:

(1) torts may result from negligent as well as intentional or criminal actions and

(2) tort lawsuits have a lower burden of proof such as preponderance of evidence
rather than beyond a reasonable doubt. Sometimes a plaintiff may prevail in a tort
case even if the person who allegedly caused harm was acquitted in an earlier
criminal trial. For example, O. J. Simpson was acquitted in criminal court of
murder but later found liable for the tort of wrongful death.

Intentional Torts

An intentional tort is when an individual or entity purposely engages in conduct
that causes injury or damage to another. For example, striking someone in a fight
would be consider an intentional act that would fall under the tort of battery;
whereas accidentally hitting another person would not qualify as intentional
because there was no intent to strike the individual ...however, this act may be
considered negligent if the person hit was injured.Although it may seem like an
intentional tort can be categorized as a criminal case, there are important
differences between the two. A crime can be defined as a wrongful act that injures
or interferes with the interests of society.

In comparison, intentional torts are wrongful acts that injure or interfere with an
individual`s well-being or property. While criminal charges are brought by the
government and can result in a fine or jail sentence, tort charges are filed by a
plaintiff seeking monetary compensation for damages that the defendant must pay
if they lose. Sometimes a wrongful act may be both a criminal and tort case.

Examples of Intentional Torts

Assault, Battery, False imprisonment, Conversion, Intentional infliction of
emotional distress, Fraud/deceit, Trespass (to land and property, Defamation

Negligence

There is a specific code of conduct which every person is expected to follow and a
legal duty of the public to act a certain way in order to reduce the risk of harm to
others. Failure to adhere to these standards is known as negligence.

                                                             162
Unlike intentional torts, negligence casesdo not involve deliberate actions, but
instead are when an individual or entity is careless and fails to provide a duty owed
to another person. The most common examples of negligence torts are cases of slip
and fall, which occur when a property owner fails to act as a reasonable person
would, thus resulting in harm to the visitor or customer. Examples of Negligence
Torts: Slip and fall accidents, Car accidents, Truck accidents, Motorcycle
accidents, Pedestrian accidents. Bicycle accidents, Medical malpractice

Common Types of Torts

The torts most likely to be heard in magistrate or metropolitan court are the kinds
that arise from intentional or negligent acts, or failures to act, that result in injury to
people or damage to property. Common torts include:assault, battery, damage to
personal property, conversion of personal property, and intentional infliction of
emotional distress. Injury to people may include emotional harm as well as
physical harm. Assault:Intentionally threatening a person with an immediate
battery.Battery: Intentional offensive touching of another person without the
person`s consent.

Intentional or accidental damage to personal property:Property damage can occur
in a number of ways, such as automobile accidents; breaking, marring or staining
of valuables; or poor aim such as baseballs or gunshots accidentally sent through
windows. But any action to recover for property damage is limited to the
jurisdiction of the court. For example, a magistrate can only decide a case
involving a fire that burned down a building if the damages are ten thousand
dollars or less. Intentional infliction of emotional distress: A claim for intentional
infliction of emotional distress requires a plaintiff to show (1) that the defendant
engaged in extreme and outrageous conduct that was done recklessly or with the
intent to cause severe emotional distress and (2) the plaintiff experienced severe
emotional distress as a result of the conduct. Extreme and outrageous conduct is
that which goes beyond bounds of common decency and is atrocious and
intolerable to the ordinary person. Severe emotional distress is distress of such an
intensity and duration that no ordinary person would be expected to tolerate it. A
plaintiff is not required to show that she has suffered a physical injury in order to
recover damages for severe emotional distress.

Tort law divides most specific torts into three general categories:

   1. Intentional Torts ­ the causing of harm by an intentional act, such as
       intentionally conning someone out of his money.

                                                             163
   2. Negligent Torts ­ the causing of harm through some negligent act, such as
       causing a car accident by running a red light.

   3. Strict Liability Torts ­ the result of harm incurred due to the actions of
       another, with no finding of fault by the defendant.

Additional and separate specific torts include:

    Defamation Torts
    Nuisance Torts
    Privacy Torts
    Economic Torts

Intentional Torts

Intentional torts are acts committed with the intent to harm another, or to
deliberately interfere with an individual`s rights to bodily safety, emotional
tranquility, privacy, control over property, freedom from deception, and freedom
from confinement. Intentional torts commonly include such issues as assault and/or
battery, false imprisonment, invasion of privacy, theft, property damage, fraud or
other deception, and trespassing.

Intent is a key issue in proving an intentional tort, as the injured party, called the
Plaintiff, must prove to the court that the other party, called the Respondent or
Defendant, acted intentionally, and knew that his actions could cause harm. In
some cases, the Plaintiff need only prove that the Defendant should have known
that his actions could cause harm. Many intentional torts may also be charged as
criminal offenses.eg Raymond stops by the local bar for a few drinks before he
heads home after work. After drinking four cocktails, Raymond gets into his car,
and runs a stop sign, crashing into another car, seriously injuring its occupants.
Although Raymond might argue that he didn`t know he would hurt someone, it is
expected that Raymond should have known that driving under the influence is
likely to cause harm, or to kill another person. Because Raymond intentionally
drank alcohol, knowing he planned on driving home, and any reasonable person
should know that drinking and driving could result in harm, he has committed an
intentional tort. In addition, Raymond may be criminally charged with felony.

Negligent Torts

The acts leading to claims of harm or injury in negligent torts are not intentional.
There are three specific elements that must be satisfied in a claim of negligence:

                                                             164
   1. The defendant must have a duty or owe a service to the plaintiff or victim
   2. The defendant must have failed that duty, or violated a promise or obligation

       to the plaintiff
   3. The plaintiff must have suffered an actual loss, injury, or damages that were

       directly caused by the plaintiff`s actions, or failure to act

Strict Liability Torts

Strict liability refers to the concept of imposing liability on a defendant, usually a
manufacturer, without proving negligent fault, or intent to cause harm. The
purpose of strict liability torts is to regulate activities that are acknowledged as
being necessary and useful to society, but which pose an abnormally high risk of
danger to the public.

Such activities may include transportation and storage of hazardous substances,
blasting, and keeping certain wild animals in captivity. The possibility of civil
lawsuits under strict liability torts keeps individuals or corporations undertaking
such dangerous acts diligent in taking every possible precaution to keep the public
safe.

Suing Under Strict Liability Tort

In a strict liability lawsuit, the law assumes that the supplier or manufacturer of the
product was aware the defect existed before the product reached the consumer.
Because of this, the plaintiff need only prove that harm or damages occurred, and
that the defendant is responsible. To successfully bring a civil lawsuit under a strict
liability tort, the following elements must be proven:

   1. The named defendant is the manufacturer of the defective product
   2. The product was defective when the plaintiff purchased it
   3. The defect was present when the defendant sold the product
   4. The defect caused the plaintiff`s injuries or damages
   5. The injuries or damages caused by the product`s defect were reasonably

       foreseeable by the defendant

A plaintiff in a strict liability lawsuit may be awarded additional damages if he can
prove that the defendant knew about the defect when the product was sold to
consumers.eg Amanda buys a new car from her local Zoom Auto dealership. Only
three months later, Amanda noticed her brakes felt soft, so she took her car to
dealer`s repair shop. They told her she just needed new brake pads, replaced them,
and sent Amanda on her way. A month later, while Amanda was driving on a busy

                                                             165
freeway, her brakes failed, and she crashed into another car. Amanda`s car was
very badly damaged, and Amanda suffered a broken arm and a concussion.

Amanda discovers, while researching the brake problem she had been having with
her car, that this particular model has had brake problems since it was first released
for sale to the public. In digging deeper, Amanda discovers that Zoom Auto knew
the car`s brake system was defective before they sold the cars, but determined it
would be too expensive to bring them all back into

4.0 SUMMARY

The word tort comes from the Latin term torquere, which means "twisted or
wrong." The English Common Law recognized no separate legal action in tort.
Instead, the British legal system afforded litigants two central avenues of redress:
Trespass for direct injuries, and actions "on the case" for indirect injuries.
Gradually, the common law recognized other civil actions, including Defamation,
LIBEL, and slander. Most of the American colonies adopted the English common
law in the eighteenth century. During the nineteenth century, the first U.S. legal
treatises were published in which a portion of the common law was synthesized
under the heading of torts.

Over the last century, tort law has touched on nearly every aspect of life in the
United States. In economic affairs, tort law provides remedies for businesses that
are harmed by the unfair and deceptive trade practices of a competitor. In the
workplace, tort law protects employees from the intentional or negligent infliction
of emotional distress. Tort law also helps regulate the environment, providing
remedies against both individuals and businesses that pollute the air, land, and
water to such an extent that it amounts to a Nuisance.

Sometimes tort law governs life's most intimate relations, as when individuals are
held liable for knowingly transmitting communicable diseases to their sexual
partners. When a loved one is killed by a tortious act, surviving family members
may bring a Wrongful Death action to recover pecuniary loss. Tort law also
governs a wide array of behavior in less intimate settings, including the operation
of motor vehicles on public roadways.

The law of torts serves four objectives. First, it seeks to compensate victims for
injuries suffered by the culpable action or inaction of others. Second, it seeks to
shift the cost of such injuries to the person or persons who are legally responsible
for inflicting them. Third, it seeks to discourage injurious, careless, and risky
behavior in the future. Fourth, it seeks to vindicate legal rights and interests that

                                                             166
have been compromised, diminished, or emasculated. In theory these objectives are
served when tort liability is imposed on tortfeasors for intentional wrongdoing,
Negligence, and ultrahazardous activities

There are a number of specific types of tort that form the basis of the majority of
civil lawsuits in the United States. These include, among others: Negligence,
Intentional Infliction of Emotional Distress, Assault, Battery, Trespass and
Products Liability.

5.0 CONCLUSION

Tort law is the body of laws that enables people to seek compensation for wrongs
committed against them. When someone`s actions cause some type of harm to
another, whether it be physical harm to another person, or harm to someone`s
property or reputation, the harmed or injured person or entity may seek damages
through the court.

Damages are a monetary award ordered by the court to be paid to an injured party,
by the party at fault. Damages may be awarded in compensation for loss of, or
damage to, personal or real property, for an injury, or for a financial loss.

The types of damages that may be awarded by the court for civil wrongs, called
tortious conduct, of an individual or entity include: Reimbursement for property loss or

property damage, Medical expenses, Pain and suffering, Loss of earning capacity and Punitive
damages,

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:

Define law of torts amd any five types of torts you have learnt in this unit,

7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS

   Glanville Williams, or grounds for lawsuit. Learning the Law. Eleventh Edition. Stevens.
1982. p. 9

   The word is derived from Old French and Anglo-French "tort" (injury), which is derived from
Medieval Latin tortum,. See Online Etymology Dictionary.

   Malone WS. (1970). Ruminations on the Role of Fault in the History of the Common Law of
Torts. Louisiana Law Review.

                                                             167
   See Medieval Sourcebook: The Anglo-Saxon Dooms, 560­975. Internet Medieval Source
Book by Fordham University.

   Bruce R. O'Brien, "Anglo-Saxon Law", in The Oxford International Encyclopedia of Legal
History, vol. 1 (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2009), 179.

   David Ibbetson, "Tort: English Common Law", in The Oxford International Encyclopedia of
Legal History, vol. 5 (Oxford: Oxford UP, 2009), 467.

Unit 7: FAMILY LAW IN NIGERIA

1.0 INTRODUCTION

In the context of human society, a family is a group of people affiliated either by consanguinity
by recognized birth, affinity by marriage or other relationship, or co-residence as implied by the
etymology of the English word family or some combination of these. Members of the immediate
family may include spouses, parents, brothers, sisters, sons, and daughters. Members of the
extended family may include grandparents, aunts, uncles, cousins, nephews, nieces, and siblings-
in-law. Sometimes these are also considered members of the immediate family, depending on an
individual's specific relationship with them.

In most societies, the family is the principal institution for the socialization of children. As the
basic unit for raising children, anthropologists generally classify most family organizations as
matrifocal a mother and her children; conjugal (a wife, her husband, and children, also called the
nuclear family; avuncular for example, a grandparent, a brother, his sister, and her children; or
extended parents and children co-reside with other members of one parent's family. Sexual
relations among the members are regulated by rules concerning incest such as the incest taboo.
The word family" can be used metaphorically to create more inclusive categories such as
community, nationhood, global village, and humanism. The field of genealogy aims to trace
family lineages through history. The family is also an important economic unit studied in family
economics. Family comes as a result of marriages. We shall look at family law and types of
marriages in Nigeria.

Nigeria is a federation of 36 states and the Federal Capital Territory, Abuja. Under the
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, as amended in 2010, the breakdown of
statutory marriage and other matters incidental to it are under the Exclusive Legislative List. This
means that the laws governing matrimonial causes are made by the National Assembly, that is,

                                                             168
federal law. Therefore, the 36 constituent states and the Federal Capital Territory cannot legislate
on dissolution of marriage and the welfare of children consequent upon dissolution.
Marriages, marital breakdown and the welfare of children in Nigeria are mainly governed by the
Matrimonial Causes Act enacted in 1970, now Cap. M7 Laws of the Federation 2004. In 1983,
the Matrimonial Causes Rules were made pursuant to the Matrimonial Causes Act. These Rules
set out the procedure for bringing matrimonial causes to court. However, the Child's Rights Act
2003 made by Nigeria pursuant to the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child has
been adopted by states like Lagos, with provisions on welfare and adoption of children. In 2012,
Lagos State enacted the Family Law Rules pursuant to the Child's Rights Law. The Rules have
greatly simplified procedures on adoption, custody, guardianship and welfare of children
generally in Lagos State.

Other laws include:

     The Maintenance Orders Act Cap MI, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 2004, which
         facilitates the enforcement in Nigeria of maintenance orders made in England and Ireland
         and other countries it has been extended to.

     The Married Women's Property Act 1882, a statute of general application in Nigeria.
     The Law Against Domestic Violence in Lagos State 2007.

In 2013, the Same Sex Marriage (Prohibition) Act 2013 was enacted by the National Assembly.
This criminalises and provides penalties for solemnisation and witnessing of same sex marriages.
In addition, Nigerian law is substantially founded on received English law (consisting of
common law, doctrine of equity, and statutes of general application which were in force on 1
January 1900. Decisions of courts in England are persuasive authority in Nigeria. Family law has
not fully developed in Nigeria compared with certain other jurisdictions. Areas like surrogacy,
pre-nuptial agreements, and division of property are not contemplated or not sufficiently
provided for in law. Case law has attempted to fill the gap by ensuring the law serves justice in
particular cases.

Nigeria is a multicultural society with over 250 ethnic groups. These ethnic groups have their
own customary laws on dissolution of marriage and, to a limited extent, welfare of children,
which regulate marriages conducted under customary law. Such rules of customary law are only
valid in so far as they do not conflict with the principles of natural justice, equity and good
conscience. There are also islamic marriages which are governed by sharia law. Once a person
opts to contract a statutory marriage, the breakdown of the marriage and related issues will be
regulated by federal enactments and not customary/sharia laws.

2.0 OBJECTIVE

At the end should be able to

* know what is family law

*The characteristics of a valid marriage

                                                             169
3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Family law also called matrimonial law is an area of the law that deals with family matters and
domestic relations, including: Marriage, civil unions, and domestic partnerships, Adoption and
surrogacy, Child abuse and child abduction, The termination of relationships and ancillary
matters, including divorce, annulment, property settlements, alimony, child custody and
visitation, child support and alimony awards, Juvenile adjudication and paternity testing and
paternity fraud.

Marriage, also called matrimony or wedlock, is a socially or ritually recognised union between
spouses that establishes rights and obligations between them, between them and their children,
and between them and their in-laws. The definition of marriage varies according to different
cultures, but it is principally an institution in which interpersonal relationships, usually sexual,
are acknowledged. In some cultures, marriage is recommended or considered to be compulsory
before pursuing any sexual activity. When defined broadly, marriage is considered a cultural
universal.

Marriage can be recognized by a state, an organization, a religious authority, a tribal group, a
local community, or peers. It is often viewed as a contract. Civil marriage, which does not exist
in some countries, is marriage without religious content carried out by a government institution
in accordance with the marriage laws of the jurisdiction, and recognised as creating the rights
and obligations intrinsic to matrimony. Marriages can be performed in a secular civil ceremony
or in a religious setting via a wedding ceremony. The act of marriage usually creates normative
or legal obligations between the individuals involved, and any offspring they may produce. In
terms of legal recognition, most sovereign states and other jurisdictions limit marriage to
opposite-sex couples and a diminishing number of these permit polygyny, child marriages, and
forced marriages. Over the twentieth century, a growing number of countries and other
jurisdictions have lifted bans on and have established legal recognition for interracial marriage,
interfaith marriage, and most recently, gender-neutral marriage. Some cultures allow the
dissolution of marriage through divorce or annulment. In some areas, child marriages and
polygamy may occur in spite of national laws against the practice.

Historically, in most cultures, married women had very few rights of their own, being
considered, along with the family's children, the property of the husband; as such, they could not
own or inherit property, or represent themselves legally see for example coverture. In Europe,
the United States, and other places in the developed world, beginning in the late 19th century and
lasting through the 21st century, marriage has undergone gradual legal changes, aimed at
improving the rights of the wife. These changes included giving wives legal identities of their
own, abolishing the right of husbands to physically discipline their wives, giving wives property
rights, liberalizing divorce laws, providing wives with reproductive rights of their own, and
requiring a wife's consent when sexual relations occur. These changes have occurred primarily in
Western countries. In the 21st century, there continue to be controversies regarding the legal
status of married women, legal acceptance of or leniency towards violence within marriage
especially sexual violence, traditional marriage customs such as dowry and bride price, forced
marriage, marriageable age, and criminalization of consensual behaviors such as premarital and
extramarital sex.

                                                             170
Legally contracted Marriage

The legal status, condition, or relationship that results from a contract by which one man and one
woman, who have the capacity to enter into such an agreement, mutually promise to live together
in the relationship of Husband and Wife in law for life, or until the legal termination of the
relationship. Marriage is a legally sanctioned contract between a man and a woman. Entering into
a marriage contract changes the legal status of both parties, giving husband and wife new rights
and obligations. Public policy is strongly in favor of marriage based on the belief that it
preserves the family unit. Traditionally, marriage has been viewed as vital to the preservation of
morals and civilization.

The traditional principle upon which the institution of marriage is founded is that a husband has
the obligation to support a wife, and that a wife has the duty to serve. In the past, this has meant
that the husband has the duty to provide a safe house, to pay for necessities such as food and
clothing, and to live in the house. A wife's obligation has traditionally entailed maintaining a
home, living in the home, having sexual relations with her husband, and rearing the couple's
children. Changes in society have modified these marital roles to a considerable degree as
married women have joined the workforce in large numbers, and more married men have
become more involved in child rearing.

Individuals who seek to alter marital rights and duties are permitted to do so only within legally
prescribed limits. Antenuptial agreements are entered into before marriage, in contemplation of
the marriage relationship. Typically these agreements involve property rights and the terms that
will be in force if a couple's marriage ends in Divorce. Separation agreements are entered into
during the marriage prior to the commencement of an action for a separation or divorce. These
agreements are concerned with Child Support, visitation, and temporary maintenance of a
spouse. The laws governing these agreements are generally concerned with protecting every
marriage for social reasons, whether the parties desire it or not. Experts suggest that couples
should try to resolve their own difficulties because that is more efficient and effective than
placing their issues before the courts.

In the United States, marriage is regulated by the states. At one time, most states recognized
Common-Law Marriage, which is entered into by agreement of the parties to be husband and
wife. In such an arrangement, no marriage license is required nor is a wedding ceremony
necessary. The parties are legally married when they agree to marry and subsequently live
together, publicly holding themselves out as husband and wife. The public policy behind the
recognition of common-law marriage is to protect the parties' expectations, if they are living as
husband and wife in every way except that they never participated in a formal ceremony. By
upholding a common-law marriage as valid, children are legitimized, surviving spouses are
entitled to receive Social Security benefits, and families are entitled to inherit property in the
absence of a will. These public policy reasons have declined in significance. Most states have
abolished common-law marriage, in large part because of the legal complications that arose
concerning property and inheritance.

The U.S. Supreme Court has held that states are permitted to reasonably regulate marriage by
prescribing who can marry and the manner in which marriage can be dissolved. States may grant

                                                             171
an Annulment or divorce on terms that they conclude are proper, because no one has the
constitutional right to remain married. There is a right to marry, however, that cannot be casually
denied. States are proscribed from absolutely prohibiting marriage in the absence of a valid
reason. The U.S. Supreme Court, for example, struck down laws in southern states that
prohibited racially mixed marriages. These antimiscegenation statutes were held to be
unconstitutional in the 1967 case of Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 87 S. Ct. 1817, 18 L. Ed. 2d
1010, because they violated Equal Protection of the laws.

On the other hand, the Court ruled in 1878 that polygamous marriages having more than one
spouse simultaneously are illegal. The requirement that marriage involve one man and one
woman was held to be essential to Western civilization and the United States in Reynolds v.
United States, 98 U.S. 145, 25 L. Ed. 244. Chief Justice MORRISON R. WAITE, writing for a
unanimous court, concluded that a state (in that case, Utah may outlaw Polygamy for everyone,
regardless of whether it is a religious duty, as the Mormons claimed it was.

All states limit people to one living husband or wife at a time and will not issue marriage licenses
to anyone who has a living spouse. Once someone is married, the person must be legally released
from his or her spouse by death, divorce, or annulment before he or she may legally remarry.
Persons who enter into a second marriage without legally dissolving a first marriage may be
charged with the crime of bigamy.

The idea that marriage is the union of one male and one female has been thought to be so basic
that it is not ordinarily specifically expressed by statute. This traditional principle has been
challenged by gays and lesbians who, until recently, have unsuccessfully sought to legalize their
relationships. In Baker v. Nelson,, 191 N.W.2d 185 Minn. 1971, the Minnesota Supreme Court
sustained the clerk's denial of a marriage license to a homosexual couple.

The 1993 decision of the Hawaii Supreme Court in Baehr v. Lewin, 852 P.2d 44, 74 Haw. 530,
revived the possibility of homosexual marriage. In Baehr, the court held that the state law
restricting legal marriage to parties of the opposite sex establishes a sex-based classification,
which is subject to strict constitutional scrutiny when challenged on equal protection grounds.
Although the court did not recognize a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, it indicated that
the state would have a difficult time proving that the gay and lesbian couples were not being
denied equal protection of the laws. On remand, the Circuit Court of Hawaii found that the state
had not met its burden, and it enjoined the state from denying marriage applications solely
because the applicants were of the same sex Baehr v. Miike, 1996 WL 694235 [Hawaii Cir. Ct.,
Dec. 3, 1996]. However, this decision was stayed pending another appeal to the Hawaii Supreme
Court. In the wake of Baehr, a number of states prepared legislation to ban same-sex marriage
and to prohibit recognition of such marriages performed in Hawaii. In 1996, Congress enacted
the Defense of Marriage Act, Pub. L. No. 104­199, 110 Sat. 219, which defines marriage as a
legal union between one man and one woman and permits states to refuse to recognize same-sex
marriages performed in other states.

Age is an additional requirement. Every jurisdiction mandates that a man and a woman must be
old enough to wed. In the 1800s, the legal age was as low as 12 years old for females. Modern
statutes ordinarily provide that females may marry at age 16 and males at age 18. Sometimes a

                                                             172
lower age is permitted with the written consent of the parents. A number of states allow for
marriage below the minimum age if the female is pregnant and a judge grants permission.

Every couple who wishes to marry must comply with a state's formal requirements. Many states
require a blood test or a blood test and physical examination before marriage, to show whether
one party is infected with a venereal disease. In some states, for example, the clerk is forbidden
to issue a marriage license until the parties present the results of the blood test. Most states
impose a waiting period between the filing of an application for a license and its issuance. The
period is usually three days, but in some states the period may reach five days. Other states
mandate a waiting period between the time when the license is issued and the date when the
marriage ceremony may take place. Many states provide that the marriage license is valid only
for a certain period of time. If the ceremony does not take place during this period, a new license
must be obtained.

It has been customary to give notice of an impending marriage to the general public. The old
form of notice was called "publication of the banns, and the upcoming marriage was announced
in each party's church three Sundays in a row before the marriage. This informed the community
of the intended marriage and gave everyone the opportunity to object if any knew of a reason
why the two persons could not be married. Today, the names of applicants for marriage licenses
are published in local newspapers.

Once a license is issued, the states require that the marriage commence with a wedding
ceremony. The ceremony may either be civil or religious because states may not require religious
observances. Ceremonial requirements are very simple and basic, in order to accommodate
everyone. In some states, nothing more is required than a declaration by each party in the
presence of an authorized person and one additional witness that he or she takes the other in
marriage.

Marriage is a legally sanctioned contract between a man and a woman. Entering into a marriage
contract changes the legal status of both parties, giving husband and wife new rights and
obligations. Public policy is strongly in favor of marriage based on the belief that it preserves the
family unit. Traditionally, marriage has been viewed as vital to the preservation of morals and
civilization. The traditional principle upon which the institution of marriage is founded is that a
husband has the obligation to support a wife, and that a wife has the duty to serve. In the past,
this has meant that the husband has the duty to provide a safe house, to pay for necessities such
as food and clothing, and to live in the house. A wife's obligation has traditionally entailed
maintaining a home, living in the home, having sexual relations with her husband, and rearing
the couple's children. Changes in society have modified these marital roles to a considerable
degree as married women have joined the workforce in large numbers, and more married men
have become more involved in child rearing.

Individuals who seek to alter marital rights and duties are permitted to do so only within legally
prescribed limits. Antenuptial agreements are entered into before marriage, in contemplation of
the marriage relationship. Typically these agreements involve property rights and the terms that
will be in force if a couple's marriage ends in Divorce. Separation agreements are entered into
during the marriage prior to the commencement of an action for a separation or divorce. These

                                                             173
agreements are concerned with Child Support, visitation, and temporary maintenance of a
spouse. The laws governing these agreements are generally concerned with protecting every
marriage for social reasons, whether the parties desire it or not. Experts suggest that couples
should try to resolve their own difficulties because that is more efficient and effective than
placing their issues before the courts.

In the United States, marriage is regulated by the states. At one time, most states recognized
Common-Law Marriage, which is entered into by agreement of the parties to be husband and
wife. In such an arrangement, no marriage license is required nor is a wedding ceremony
necessary. The parties are legally married when they agree to marry and subsequently live
together, publicly holding themselves out as husband and wife. The public policy behind the
recognition of common-law marriage is to protect the parties' expectations, if they are living as
husband and wife in every way except that they never participated in a formal ceremony. By
upholding a common-law marriage as valid, children are legitimized, surviving spouses are
entitled to receive Social Security benefits, and families are entitled to inherit property in the
absence of a will. These public policy reasons have declined in significance. Most states have
abolished common-law marriage, in large part because of the legal complications that arose
concerning property and inheritance.

The U.S. Supreme Court has held that states are permitted to reasonably regulate marriage by
prescribing who can marry and the manner in which marriage can be dissolved. States may grant
an Annulment or divorce on terms that they conclude are proper, because no one has the
constitutional right to remain married. There is a right to marry, however, that cannot be casually
denied. States are proscribed from absolutely prohibiting marriage in the absence of a valid
reason. The U.S. Supreme Court, for example, struck down laws in southern states that
prohibited racially mixed marriages. These antimiscegenation statutes were held to be
unconstitutional in the 1967 case of Loving v. Virginia, 388 U.S. 1, 87 S. Ct. 1817, 18 L. Ed. 2d
1010, because they violated Equal Protection of the laws.

On the other hand, the Court ruled in 1878 that polygamous marriages (i.e., having more than
one spouse simultaneously) are illegal. The requirement that marriage involve one man and one
woman was held to be essential to Western civilization and the United States in Reynolds v.
United States, 98 U.S. 145, 25 L. Ed. 244. Chief Justice MORRISON R. WAITE, writing for a
unanimous court, concluded that a state (in that case, Utah) may outlaw Polygamy for everyone,
regardless of whether it is a religious duty, as the Mormons claimed it was.

All states limit people to one living husband or wife at a time and will not issue marriage licenses
to anyone who has a living spouse. Once someone is married, the person must be legally released
from his or her spouse by death, divorce, or annulment before he or she may legally remarry.
Persons who enter into a second marriage without legally dissolving a first marriage may be
charged with the crime of bigamy.

The idea that marriage is the union of one male and one female has been thought to be so basic
that it is not ordinarily specifically expressed by statute. This traditional principle has been
challenged by gays and lesbians who, until recently, have unsuccessfully sought to legalize their

                                                             174
relationships. In Baker v. Nelson,, 191 N.W.2d 185 (Minn. 1971), the Minnesota Supreme Court
sustained the clerk's denial of a marriage license to a homosexual couples.

The 1993 decision of the Hawaii Supreme Court in Baehr v. Lewin, 852 P.2d 44, 74 Haw. 530,
revived the possibility of homosexual marriage. In Baehr, the court held that the state law
restricting legal marriage to parties of the opposite sex establishes a sex-based classification,
which is subject to strict constitutional scrutiny when challenged on equal protection grounds.
Although the court did not recognize a constitutional right to same-sex marriage, it indicated that
the state would have a difficult time proving that the gay and lesbian couples were not being
denied equal protection of the laws. On remand, the Circuit Court of Hawaii found that the state
had not met its burden, and it enjoined the state from denying marriage applications solely
because the applicants were of the same sex (Baehr v. Miike, 1996 WL 694235 [Hawaii Cir. Ct.,
Dec. 3, 1996]). However, this decision was stayed pending another appeal to the Hawaii
Supreme Court. In the wake of Baehr, a number of states prepared legislation to ban same-sex
marriage and to prohibit recognition of such marriages performed in Hawaii. In 1996, Congress
enacted the Defense of Marriage Act, Pub. L. No. 104­199, 110 Sat. 219, which defines
marriage as a legal union between one man and one woman and permits states to refuse to
recognize same-sex marriages performed in other states.

Age is an additional requirement. Every jurisdiction mandates that a man and a woman must be
old enough to wed. In the 1800s, the legal age was as low as 12 years old for females. Modern
statutes ordinarily provide that females may marry at age 16 and males at age 18. Sometimes a
lower age is permitted with the written consent of the parents. A number of states allow for
marriage below the minimum age if the female is pregnant and a judge grants permission.

Every couple who wishes to marry must comply with a state's formal requirements. Many states
require a blood test or a blood test and physical examination before marriage, to show whether
one party is infected with a venereal disease. In some states, for example, the clerk is forbidden
to issue a marriage license until the parties present the results of the blood test.

Most states impose a waiting period between the filing of an application for a license and its
issuance. The period is usually three days, but in some states the period may reach five days.
Other states mandate a waiting period between the time when the license is issued and the date
when the marriage ceremony may take place. Many states provide that the marriage license is
valid only for a certain period of time. If the ceremony does not take place during this period, a
new license must be obtained.

It has been customary to give notice of an impending marriage to the general public. The old
form of notice was called "publication of the banns," and the upcoming marriage was announced
in each party's church three Sundays in a row before the marriage. This informed the community
of the intended marriage and gave everyone the opportunity to object if any knew of a reason
why the two persons could not be married. Today, the names of applicants for marriage licenses
are published in local newspapers.

Once a license is issued, the states require that the marriage commence with a wedding
ceremony. The ceremony may either be civil or religious because states may not require religious

                                                             175
observances. Ceremonial requirements are very simple and basic, in order to accommodate
everyone. In some states, nothing more is required than a declaration by each party in the
presence of an authorized person and one additional witness that he or she takes the other in
marriage.

A minority of states have sought to curb growing divorce rates by enacting legislation designed
to encourage couples to remain married. Statutes in states such as Arkansas, Arizona, and

Types of marriages in nigeria

The type, functions, and characteristics of marriage vary from culture to culture, and can change
over time. In general there are two types: civil marriage and religious marriage, and typically
marriages employ a combination of both (religious marriages must often be licensed and
recognized by the state, and conversely civil marriages, while not sanctioned under religious law,
are nevertheless respected). Marriages between people of differing religions are called interfaith
marriages, while marital conversion, a more controversial concept than interfaith marriage, refers
to the religious conversion of one partner to the other's religion for sake of satisfying a religious
requirement.

Arranged marriage ­ A marriage that is at some level arranged by someone other than those
being married..

Polygamy, monogamy, and polyandry

Polyandry means a woman having multiple husbands occurs very rarely in a few isolated tribal
societies. These societies include some bands of the Canadian Inuit, although the practice has
declined sharply in the 20th century due to their conversion from tribal religion to Christianity by
Moravian missionaries. Additionally, the Spartans were notable for practicing polyandry.
Societies which permit group marriage are extremely rare, but have existed in Utopian societies
such as the Oneida Community.

Today, many married people practice various forms of consensual nonmonogamy, including
polyamory and Swinging. These people have agreements with their spouses that permit other
intimate relationships or sexual partners. Therefore, the concept of marriage need not necessarily
hinge on sexual or emotional monogamy.

Christian acceptance of monogamy

In the Christian society, a one man one woman model for the Christian marriage was advocated
by Saint Augustine 354-439 AD with his published letter The Good of Marriage. To discourage
polygamy, he wrote it "was lawful among the ancient fathers: whether it be lawful now also, I
would not hastily pronounce. For there is not now necessity of begetting children, as there then

                                                             176
was, when, even when wives bear children, it was allowed, in order to a more numerous
posterity, to marry other wives in addition, which now is certainly not lawful. Sermons from St.
Augustine's letters were popular and influential. In 534 AD Roman Emperor Justinian
criminalized all but monogamous man/woman sex within the confines of marriage.

Two major types of marriage exist in Nigeria: monogamy, a marriage of one man to one woman,
and polygyny, a marriage of one man to two or more wives. In most cultural groups in Nigeria,
traditional marriage is usually an arrangement between two families as opposed to an
arrangement between two individuals. Accordingly, there is pressure on the bride and
bridegroom to make the marriage work as any problem will usually affect both families and
strain the otherwise cordial relationship between them. In most Nigerian cultures, the man
usually pays the dowry or bride-price and is thus considered the head of the family. Adultery is
acceptable for men, but forbidden for women. Marriage ceremonies vary among Nigerian
cultures.

Islamic marriages

In Islam, marriage is a legal contract between two people. Both the groom and the bride are to
consent to the marriage of their own free wills. A formal, binding contract is considered integral
to a religiously valid Islamic marriage, and outlines the rights and responsibilities of the groom
and bride. There must be two Muslim witnesses of the marriage contract. Divorce in Islam can
take a variety of forms, some initiated by the husband and some initiated by the wife. In addition
to the usual marriage until death or divorce, there is a different fixed-term marriage known as
zawj al-mutah pleasure marriage. permitted only by the Twelver branch of Shia Islam for a
pre-fixed period. There is also Nikah Misyar, a non-temporary marriage with the removal of
some conditions such as living together, permitted by Sunni Muslims.

Conditions for marriage

Islamic marriages require acceptance, in Arabic, of the groom, the bride and the consent of the
custodian (wali) of the bride. The wali of the bride is normally a male relative of the bride,
preferably her father. The guardian (wali) of the bride can only be a free Muslim. The bride is
normally present at the signing of the marriage contract. The Wali mujbir is a technical term of
Islamic law which denotes the guardian of a bride. In traditional Islam, the literal definition of
wali, which means custodian or protector, is used. In this context, it is meant that the silence of
the bride is considered consent. In most schools of Islamic law, only the father or the paternal
grandfather of the bride can be wali mujbir.

If the conditions are met and a mahr and contract are agreed upon, an Islamic marriage
ceremony, or wedding, can take place. The marital contract is also often signed by the bride. The
consent of the bride is mandatory. Hadith The Islamic marriage is then declared publicly, in
Arabic: by a responsible person after delivering a sermon to counsel and guide the couple. It is
not required, though customary, that the person marrying the couple should be religiously
qualified. The bridegroom can deliver the sermon himself in the presence of representatives of
both sides if he is religiously educated, as the story goes about Imam Muhammad bin Ali around
829 AD and recently in Kashmir in 2013 AD by Muhammad Asif bin Ali more than eleven

                                                             177
centuries later. It is typically followed by a celebratory reception in line with the couple's or local
customs, which could either last a couple of hours or precede the wedding and conclude several
days after the ceremony.

The Qur'an tells believers that even if they are poor they should marry to protect themselves
from immorality. The Quran asserts that marriage is a legitimate way to satisfy one's sexual
desire. Islam recognizes the value of sex and companionship and advocates marriage as the
foundation for families and channeling the fulfillment of a base need. Marriage is highly valued
and regarded as being half of one's faith, according to a saying of Muhammad. Whether marriage
is obligatory or merely allowed has been explored by several scholars, and agreed that If a
person has the means to marry and has no fear of mistreating his wife or of committing the
unlawful if he does marry, then marriage in his case is mustahabb preferred.

Prerequisites

The Qur'an outlines some conditions for a marriage to take place. A marriage should be
conducted through a contract and a mandatory sum of wealth provided to the bride, which here
refers to the mahr. Once a mahr has been ascertained with the realization that it is an obligation
of a Muslim husband, the groom is required to pay it to the bride at the time of marriage unless
he and his bride can mutually agree to delay the time of some of its payment. In 2003, Rubya
Mehdi published an article in which the culture of mahr among Muslims was thoroughly
reviewed. There is no concept of dowry as such in Islam, although mahr is often translated into
English as dowry in the want of a more accurate word. A dowry as such is a payment to the
groom from the bride's family, and is not an Islamic custom. Bride prices are also expressly
prohibited. Another requisite of marriage is chastity. No fornicator has the right to marry a chaste
partner except if the two purify themselves of this sin by sincere repentance.

Spoken consent of the woman is only required if she is not a virgin and her wali is neither her
father nor her paternal grandfather. But a virgin may not be married off without her permission.
If she is too shy to express her opinion her silence will be considered as implicit agreement [Al
Bukhari:6968. The wali, who can force a bride against her outspoken will into marriage, is called
wali mujbir, according to The Encyclopaedia of Islam. If the woman was forced into a marriage,
without the above-mentioned conditions, according to the Hanafi school of Islamic law the
decision can be revoked, when the bride comes of age. Binti Khudham says that when she
became a widow her father solemnized her marriage. She did not like the decision so she went to
Muhammad, who gave her permission to revoke her marriage.[38] Hence, forced marriages are
against Islamic teachings if the woman is a virgin, and those forced into marriages before they
have come of age have the right to contest them once they do.

The importance of the wali is debated between the different schools of thought. To the Hanafi
Sunnis, a male guardian is not required for the bride to become married, even if it is her first
marriage. Therefore, the marriage contract is signed between the bride and the groom, not the
groom and the wali. To the Hanbali, Shafi'i, and Maliki Sunni schools, a wali is required in order
for a virginal woman to marry. In these schools, if a woman has been divorced, she becomes her
own guardian and does not need a wali to sign a marriage contract.

                                                             178
Rights and obligations of spouses

According to Islam, both men and woman have rights over each other when they enter into a
marriage contract with the husband serving as protector and supporter of the family most of the
time, from his means. This guardianship has two aspects for both partners:

The husband is financially responsible for the welfare and maintenance of his wife or wives and
any children they produce, to include at a minimum, providing a home, food and clothing. In
return, it is the duty of the wife to safeguard the husband's possessions and protect how wealth is
spent. If the wife has wealth in her own capacity she is not obliged to spend it upon the husband
or children, as she can own property and assets in her own right, so the husband has no right for
her property and assets except by her will. A pre-marital agreement of the financial expectation
from the husband is in the mahr, given by him to the wife for her exclusive use, which is
included as part of his financial responsibility.

Several commentators have stated that the superiority of a husband over his wife is relative, and
the obedience of the wife is also restrictive. The Quran advises men that if they are certain of a
rebellious attitude by the woman, they should first admonish her, then refuse to share beds, and
finally beat (darab) her, according to Qur'an 4:34. Today most Islamic scholars agree that it be
without leaving a mark and not on the face. This refers to serious breaches of behaviour such as
being promiscuous according to renowned 20th-century scholar Muhammad Hamidullah which
is not expected from a dutiful wife, and not for simple disobedience to the husband. In explaining
this, Ibn Abbas gives an example of striking with a toothstick.

Women are also reminded that in case the husband is not fulfilling his responsibilities, there is no
stigma on them in seeking divorce. The Quran re-emphasizes that justice for the woman includes
emotional support, and reminds men that there can be no taking back of the mahr or bridal gifts
given to women. In unfortunate cases where the agreement was to postpone payment of the
mahr, some husbands will bully their wives and insist on the return of what he gave her in order
to agree to the dissolution of the marriage, this is un-Islamic and cruel. Where the husband has
been abusive or neglectful of his responsibilities, he does not have the right to take his wife`s
property in exchange for her freedom from him. Unfortunately most couples refuse to go to the
judge and binding arbitration for these issues even though the Quran says: And if you fear a
breach between them, then appoint an arbiter from his folk and an arbiter from her folk. If they
the arbiters desire reconciliation, Allah will affect it between them. Surely, Allah is All-
Knowing, All-Aware.

Marriage contracts and forced/unconsented marriages

The marriage contract is concluded between the wali, or guardian, of the bride and bridegroom,
not between bridegroom and bride. The wali of the bride can only be a free Muslim. The wali of
the bride is normally a male relative of the bride, preferably her father. If the bride is a virgin, the
wali mujbir, that is her father or paternal grandfather, can not force the bride into the marriage
against her proclaimed will; according to most scholars. According to Khomeini and Ali al-
Sistani, both Shia scholars both having the degrees mujtahid and marja', and also almost all

                                                             179
contemporary scholars, the marriage is invalid without bride's free consent and no obligation can
make marriage official and legal.

The notable example to this is the Hanafi school the largest of the four classical schools of
Islamic thought), which holds that a bride's permission is required if she has reached puberty.
They also hold that if a bride was forced into marriage before reaching puberty; then upon
attaining puberty, she has the option to nullify the marriage if she wishes. A wali other than the
father or the paternal grandfather of the bride, then called wali mukhtar, needs the consent of the
bride according to the majority of scholars. If the bride is silent about the issue, i.e. her wali
expressed his intention to marry her off to a certain man, and she did not object to it; then
consent is assumed via her lack of objection. For all schools of Islamic jurisprudence the
systematization of their school is the guideline for their decision, not single hadiths, that liberal
Muslims often cite. Two of these hadiths are the following:

Abu Hurayrah reported that the Prophet said: "A non-virgin woman may not be married without
her command, and a virgin may not be married without her permission; and it is permission
enough for her is to remain silent because of her natural shyness." [Al-Bukhari:6455, Muslim &
Others. It is reported in a hadith that A'ishah related that she asked the Prophet : In the case of a
young girl whose parents marry her off, should her permission be sought or not? He replied:
"Yes, she must give her permission." She then said: "But a virgin would be shy, O Messenger of
Allaah!" He replied: "Her silence is considered as her permission." Al-Bukhari, Muslim, &
Others.

Divorce

Divorce in Islam can take a variety of forms, some initiated by the husband and some initiated by
the wife. The theory and practice of divorce in the Islamic world have varied according to time
and place. Historically, the rules of divorce were governed by sharia, as interpreted by traditional
Islamic jurisprudence, and they differed depending on the legal school. Historical practice
sometimes diverged from legal theory. In modern times, as personal status family laws were
codified, they generally remained within the orbit of Islamic law, but control over the norms of
divorce shifted from traditional jurists to the state.

Relationships which prohibit marriage

In certain sections of the pre-Islamic Arab tradition, the son could inherit his deceased father's
other wives i.e. not his own mother) as a wife. The Qur'an prohibited this practice. Marriage
between people related in some way is subject to prohibitions based on three kinds of
relationship. The following prohibitions are given from the male perspective for brevity; the
analogous counterparts apply from the female perspective; e.g., for "aunt" read "uncle". A bride
signing the nikah nama (marriage certificate)

Prohibited marriages

Quran States

                                                             180
O ye who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women forcefully

(Al-Quran 4:19)

And don't marry women to whom you father has ever married except what has passed. Indeed it
was lewdness, disbelief, and a bad way. Prohibited to you are your mothers, your daughters, your
sisters, your paternal aunts, your maternal aunts, brother's daughters, sister's daughters, your
mothers that are those who suckled you, your sisters from suckling, mothers of your women,
your step-daughters in your guardianship from your women you have entered upon but if you
have not entered upon them then there is no blame on you, women of your sons from your loins,
and that addition of two sisters (in a wedlock) except what has passed. Surely God is All-
forgiving All-merciful.

Prohibitions based on consanguinity

Seven relations are prohibited because of consanguinity i.e. kinship or relationship by blood, viz.
mothers, daughters, sisters, paternal aunts, maternal aunts and nieces (whether sister's or
brother's daughters. In this case, no distinction is made between full and half relations, both
being equally prohibited. Distinction is however made with step relations i.e. where both the
biological mother and father of a couple wishing to marry are separate individuals for both
parties, in which case it is permitted. The word mother also connotes the father`s mother and
mother`s mother all the way up. Likewise the word "daughter" also includes the son`s daughter
and daughter`s daughter" all the way down. The sister of the maternal grandfather and of the
paternal grandmother (great aunts) are also included on equal basis in the application of the
directive.

Prohibitions based on suckling

Marriage to what are sometimes described as foster relations in English are not permitted,
although the concept of "fosterage" is not the same as is implied by the English word. The
relationship is that formed by suckling from the breast of a wet nurse. This is what is meant by
fosterage in Islam in the quotation below. In Islam, the infant is regarded as having the same
degree of affinity to the wet nurse as in consanguinity, so when the child grows up marriage is
prohibited to those related to the wet nurse by the same degree as if to the child's own mother.
Hadith reports confirm that fosterage does not happen by a chance suckling, it refers to the first
two years of a child's life before it is weaned Islahi writes that "this relationship is established
only with the full intent of those involved. It only comes into being after it is planned and is well
thought of.

Prohibitions based on marriage

The daughter-in-law is prohibited for the father, and the mother-in-law, the wife`s daughter, the
wife`s sister and daughters of the wife's siblings nieces, the maternal and paternal aunts of the
wife are all prohibited for the husband. However, these are conditional prohibitions:

    1. Only the daughter of that wife is prohibited with whom one has had conjugal contact.

                                                             181
    2. Only the daughter-in-law of a real son is prohibited.
    3. The sister of a wife, her maternal and paternal aunts and her brother's or sister's daughters

         nieces are only prohibited if the wife is in wedlock with the husband.

Prohibition based on religion

Quran states Do not marry your girls to unbelievers until they believe: A man slave who believes
is better than an unbeliever, even though he allures you. Unbelievers do (but) beckon you to the
Fire. But God beckons by His Grace to the Garden (of bliss) and forgiveness, and makes His
Signs clear to mankind: That they may celebrate His praise." (Al-Quran 2:221)

O ye who believe! When there come to you believing women refugees, examine (and test) them:
God knows best as to their Faith: if ye ascertain that they are Believers, then send them not back
to the Unbelievers. They are not lawful wives for the Unbelievers, nor are the Unbelievers lawful
husbands for them. (Al-Quran 60:10)

never will Allah give the disbelievers over the believers a way [to overcome them].(Al-Quran
4:141)

it is not lawful by Allah Almighty for Muslim women to marry non Muslim men of any faith.
(Quran 2:221 60:10 4:141)
but It is lawful for Muslim men to marry only Jewish or Christian women. (Quran 5:5)

Polygamy

According to sharia law, Muslims are allowed to practice polygamy. According to the Qur'an, a
man may have up to four legal wives at any one time. The husband is required to treat all wives
equally. If a man fears that he will not be able to meet these conditions then he is not allowed
more than one wife.

"If he fears that he shall not be able to deal justly with the orphans, marry women of your choice,
two, or three, or four; but if he fear that he shall not be able to deal justly (with them), then only
one, or that which your right hands possess. That will be more suitable, to prevent you from
doing injustice." (Qur'an 4:3) Yusuf Ali translation. A bride-to-be may include terms in her
marriage contract that require monogamy for her husband or require her consent before he
marries another wife. Polyandry is forbidden. A woman cannot have more than one husband at a
time.

Iddah

A woman cannot marry after divorce or death of her husband for a certain period. This period is
known as iddah.

     A divorcee cannot marry for three menstrual cycles after divorce
     A divorcee who has no courses cannot marry for three months
     A pregnant woman cannot marry until laying her burden

                                                             182
     A widow cannot remarry for four months and ten days

Other types of customary law marriage

Besides the strict bride-price marriage, which is the commonest type, and the one most
commonly contracted, there are other relationships which are regarded as marriage in customary
law. While some of them possess the characteristics of a bride price marriage, others display
different and unique features. There are essential and formal requirements for the celebration of
valid customary law marriages. Although the details of such requirements vary from one locality
to another, the broad principles are sometimes similar.

Capacity

The parties to a customary-law marriage must possess the capacity under that law to marry each
other.

Age

Most systems of customary law in Nigeria do not prescribe any age for the solemnization of
customary-law marriage. This lacuna in the rule of customary law has to a large extent
encouraged a high incidence of child marriage, with all its attendant evils. While in some areas
child betrothal is rampant, marriage does not in fact take place until the parties have attained the
age of puberty. Where a girl under sixteen years marries under customary law, the consumation
of that marriage does not constitute the sexual offence of having unlawful carnal knowledge of
her under the Criminal Code Act. This is because Section 6 of the Code defines 'unlawful carnal
knowledge' to exclude sexual relations between husband and wife. Usually, where a provision of
the Code applies only to the husband and wife of a statutory marriage, this is clearly specified. In
the absence of such qualification it is submitted that 'husband and wife' includes the parties lo
customary-law marriage, which is a system of marriage recognized by Nigerian law.

In some parts of the country, the minimum age for customary-law marriage has been fixed by
legislation. The age of marriage under customary law is governed in the three Eastern States of
Nigeria by the Age of Marriage Law 1956. Section 3(1) of the Law provides that 'A marriage . . .
between or in respect of persons either of whom is under the age of sixteen shall be void'. If a
party to such a void marriage is charged with any of the sexual offences under the Cnminal Code
arising from having unlawful carnal knowledge of a girl, it is a good defence lo prove that the
accused had reasonable cause to believe that the girl in question was his wife.

By section 4(1) of the Law, it is an offence punishable with six months' imprisonment or a fine
of two hundred Naira for any person to ask, receive or obtain any property or benefit of any kind
for himself or for any other person on account of marriage which is void under the Law.
Similarly it is an offence to give, confer on, or procure from any person any property or benefit
in relation to such void marriage. In these cases, ignorance of the parties' age is no defence
unless the accused can prove that he took reasonable steps to verify the ages of the parties to the

                                                             183
marriage. When the age of a person is in issue in a prosecution under the Law, the opinion of a
qualified medical practioner on that question is sufficient and cannot be questioned in any court.

Under Section 6, no court shall take cognizance of any marriage that is made void by this
legislation. This provision seems too wide for the purpose of attaining the objectives of the
statute. It is submitted that, at least, it should be made possible for courts to determine the
validity or invalidity of a marriage. This section should, therefore, be construed accordingly so as
to make its contents reasonable.

In Emeakuana v Umeojiako.m the respondent claimed for an order that he is the legal and natural
father of a female child born by the second appellant on December 27, 1972 and therefore
entitled to be granted its custody. Both the second appellant and her father gave evidence in the
lower court that the former was about fifteen years of age when the marriage with the respondent
was celebrated. That piece of evidence was not contradicted or questioned. Obi-Okoye, J., (as he
then was) held that the marriage in question contravened section 3(1) of the Age of Marriage
Law and was, therefore, void.

Except for the cases which have reached the courts, evidence abound that the prohibition of the
Age of Marriage Law is not observed in many parts of the four Eastern States.

In four Native Authority areas in three of the Northern States of Nigeria-Biu (Borno State),
Idoma, and Tiv (Benue State), and Borgu Kwara State the marriageable age for girls has been
fixed by the various Declarations of Native marriage law and custom Orders made in respect of
these areas. The following ages for girls have been prescribed for the respective areas: Biu
fourteen years; Idoma twelve years; Tiv age of puberty; and Borgu - thirteen years;In Borgu and
idoma, any man who marries a girl below the stated age, and the father or guardian of such girl
who permits such marriage, are guilty of an offence punishable with a fine of 100Naira or
imprisonment for six months, or both.

Termination of marriages in Nigeria

Nigeria enacted the Matrimonial Causes Act in 1970 to regulate the dissolution of statutory
marriage. But this limitation to statutory marriage only entails shortcomings in respect of the
other marriage systems that are also found in Nigeria: customary and Islamic marriage. All three
systems, based on very different traditions, are, in principle, largely incompatible. This becomes
particularly apparent when a marriage between the same persons contracted both under
customary and statutory law is to be divorced. The requirements for customary and statutory
divorce are not congruous in the different concepts of the potentially polygamous, customary
(and Islamic) marriage and of the monogamous, statutory marriage. There are no provisions in
the Matrimonial Causes Act considering obvious conflict situations. Reform has been frequently
suggested but has not been implemented yet.

This article tries at first to analyse the main aspects of customary, Islamic and statutory marriage
and, especially, divorce, for in the case of the dissolution of marriage the distinguishing elements
become most apparent. Then a proposal of an integrating divorce law will be presented which
takes account of central features of the present marriage systems. It will be shown that many

                                                             184
essential elements of these systems can be retained and combined to some extent in a unifying
law. The proposal will frequently refer to the Tanzanian Law of Marriage Act 1971 which
constitutes a fairly convincing attempt to unify different marriage systems.

5.0 SUMMARY

Marriage, also called matrimony or wedlock, is a socially or ritually recognised union between
spouses that establishes rights and obligations between those spouses, as well as between them
and any resulting biological or adopted children and affinity (in-laws and other family through
marriage. The definition of marriage varies not only between cultures or religions, but also
within them throughout their histories, evolving to both expand or contract in what is
encompassed, but typically it is principally an institution in which interpersonal relationships,
usually sexual, are acknowledged or sanctioned. In some cultures, marriage is recommended or
considered to be compulsory before pursuing any sexual activity. When defined broadly,
marriage is considered a cultural universal.

Individuals may marry for several reasons, including legal, social, libidinal, emotional, financial,
spiritual, and religious purposes. Whom they marry may be influenced by socially determined
rules of incest, prescriptive marriage rules, parental choice and individual desire. In some areas
of the world, arranged marriage, child marriage, polygamy, and sometimes forced marriage, may
be practiced as a cultural tradition. Conversely, such practices may be outlawed and penalized in
parts of the world out of concerns of the infringement of women's rights, or the infringement of
children's rights (both female and male children, and because of international law. In developed
parts of the world, there has been a general trend towards ensuring equal rights within marriage
for women and legally recognizing the marriages of interfaith, interracial, and same-sex couples.
These trends coincide with the broader human rights movement.

6.0 CONCLUSION

Bride Price, Celebration of marriage, Registration Of Customary Marriage, Proof Of Marriage,
Proof Of Customary Law Marriage, Islamic Law Marriage, Celebration Of Customary Marriage
and Other Types Of Customary Marriage

7.0 REFERENCES FOR FURTHER READING.

Colvin, Robert. "Buying Cooperatives Are a Useful Weapon." Modern Plastics. January 2001.

Diekmann, Frank J. "CUs May Cooperate, but Cooperative? Not at First." Credit Union Journal.
18 September 2000.

Earnshaw, Aliza. "Remember Food Co-Ops? Portland's Still Flourishes." Business Journal-
Portland. 25 August 2000.

                                                             185
"Group Dynamics." Creative Review. September 2000.
Murray, John E. "Communal Viability and Employment of Non-Member Labor: Testing
Hypotheses with Historical Data." Review of Social Economy. March 2000.
Solnik, Claude. "Old Fashioned Buying Cooperatives Are Catching On." Long Island Business
News. 6 January 2006.
Stevens Hume, Lynn. Indiana Cooperatives Not Political Subdivisions and Can't Issue Tax-
Exempts, IRS Ruling Says.The Bond Buyer. 16 December 1991.

                                                             186
MODULE 4: THE ADMINISTRATION OF CRIMINAL JUSTICE SYSTEM IN
NIGERIA

Unit 1: THE NIGERIAN POLICE

1.0 INTRODUCTION :

The importance of criminal justice to the smooth running of any society cannot be over
emphasized. Indeed an effective criminal justice system is regarded by many as fundamental to
the maintenance of law and order. However the Nigerian criminal justice system is not only
dysfunctional it is also outdated and absolutely not fit for purpose many of the provisions are
outdated and in some cases anachronistic. Besides, the loopholes in the law and procedure have
become so obvious that lawyers especially defense lawyers have become masters in dilatory
tactics. It has thus become increasingly difficult to reach closure of any kind in many criminal
cases. Convictions and acquittals have become exceedingly rare. While the foregoing assertion is
quite instructive, It is pertinent to note that these views are widely held among many legal
practitioners and eminent jurist, who have also called for fundamental reform to the Nigerian
criminal justice system.

An effective criminal justice system is fundamental to the maintenance of law and order.
Criminal justice, because it addresses behavioral issues, must be dynamic and proactive.
Consequently, many of the provisions are outdated and in some cases anachronistic. Besides, the
loopholes in the laws and procedure have become so obvious that lawyers especially defense
lawyers have become masters in dilatory tactics. It has thus, become increasingly difficult to
reach closure of any kind in many criminal cases. Convictions or acquittals have become
exceedingly rare.

2.0 OBJECTIVES:

At the end of the unit you will be able to understand

*The security agent involved in the Administration of Criminal justice in Nigeria.

*The role of the Nigerian police in carrying investigation

*the organization structure of

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

Section 214.(1) of the 1999 Nigerian constitution provides that:
There shall be a police force for Nigeria, which shall be known as the Nigeria Police Force, and subject to
the provisions of this section no other police force shall be established for the Federation or any part
thereof.

(2)  Subject  to  the  provisions  of  this  Constitution   -

                       187
(a) the Nigeria Police Force shall be organised and administered in accordance with such provisions as
may be prescribed by an act of the National Assembly;

(b) the members of the Nigeria Police shall have such powers and duties as maybe conferred upon them

by                    law;

(c) the National Assembly may make provisions for branches of the Nigeria Police Force forming part of
the armed forces of the Federation or for the protection of harbours, waterways, railways and air fields.

The Police Act is an act to make provision for the organisation, discipline, powers and duties of the

police, the special constabulary and the traffic wardens. [1967 No. 41.] [1st April, 1943].

According to the Police Act, the duties of The police shall be the prevention and detection of crime, the

apprehension of offenders, the preservation of law and order, the protection of life and property and

the due enforcement of all laws and regulations with which they are directly charged, and shall perform

such military duties within or outside Nigeria as may be required of them by, or under the authority of

this  or  any  other  Act.

When it concerns public safety and public order as provided for in section 215 of the Constitution, The
President may give to the Inspector-General such directions with respect to the maintaining and
securing of public safety and public order as he may consider necessary, and the Inspector-General shall
comply with those directions or cause them to be complied with. Similarly, the Commissioner of a State
shall comply with the directions of the Governor of the State with respect to the maintaining and
securing of public safety and public order within the State, or cause them to be complied with: (Provided
that before carrying out any such direction the Commissioner may request that the matter should be
referred to the President for his directions. The officer's powers and duties are conferred by statute.

The Nigerian PoliceForce (NPF) is the principal law enforcement agency in Nigeria with a staff
strength of about 371,800. There are currently plans to increase the force to 650,000, adding
280,000 new recruits to the existing 370,000. The NP is a very large organization consisting of
36 State commands grouped into 12 zones and 7 administrative organs. The agency is currently
headed by IGP Ibrahim Kpotun Idris.

History of Nigeria Police Force

Nigeria's police was first established in 1820. The first person to have the highest rank in all the
police is commissioner general colonel KK. In 1879 a 1,200-member armed paramilitary Hausa
Constabulary was formed. In 1896 the Lagos Police was established. A similar force, the Niger
Coast Constabulary, was formed in Calabar in 1894 under the newly proclaimed Niger Coast
Protectorate. In the north, the Royal Niger Company set up the Royal Niger Company
Constabulary in 1888 with headquarters. When the protectorates of Northern and Southern
Nigeria were proclaimed in the early 1900s, part of the Royal Niger Company Constabulary
became the Northern Nigeria Police, and part of the Niger Coast Constabulary became the
Southern Nigeria Police. During the colonial period, most police were associated with local

                                                             188
governments native authorities. In the 1960s, under the First Republic, these forces were first
regionalised and then nationalised.

The NPF performed conventional police functions and was responsible for internal security
generally; for supporting the prison, immigration, and customs services; and for performing
military duties within or outside Nigeria as directed. Plans were announced in mid-1980 to
expand the force to 200,000. By 1983, according to the federal budget, the strength of the NPF
was almost 152,000, but other sources estimated it to be between 20,000 and 80,000. Reportedly,
there were more than 1,300 police stations nationwide. Police officers were not usually armed
but were issued weapons when required for specific missions or circumstances. They were often
deployed throughout the country, but in 1989 Babangida announced that a larger number of
officers would be posted to their native areas to facilitate police- community relations.

The Nigerian Police is designated by Section 194 of the 1999 constitution as the national police
of Nigeria with exclusive jurisdiction throughout the country. Constitutional provision also
exists, however, for the establishment of separate NPF branches forming part of the armed forces
of the Federation or for their protection of harbours, waterways, railways and airfields. One such
branch, the Port Security Police, was reported by different sources to have a strength in 1990 of
between 1,500 and 12,000.

Organization structure of the Nigeria police

The NPF maintains a three-tier administrative structure of departments, zonal and state
commands.

Departments

Title                                    Departments       Responsibilities

Department of Finance and    Finance and Administration    General administration and
Administration                                             Finance

Department of Operations     Operations                    Crime prevention, Public Order,
                                                           Public Safety

Department of Logistics and  Logistics and Supply          Works and Police Estate
Supply                                                     Management

Department of Criminal       Force Criminal Investigation  Investigation
Investigation                Department (FORCID)

Department of Training and   Training                      Human resources
Development

                                         189
Department of Research and Planning, Research and         Statistics and Data
                                                          Communication management
Planning                   Development

Department of Information  Information and communication
Technology                 technology

The NPF was under the general operational and administrative control of an Inspector General
appointed by the president and responsible for the maintenance of law and order. He was
supported at headquarters in Lagos by a Deputy Inspector General (DIG) and in each state by
police commissioners. The 1979 constitution provided for a Police Service Commission that was
responsible for NPF policy, organization, administration, and finance (except for pensions, In
February 1989, Babangida abolished the Police Service Commission and established the Nigeria
Police Council in its stead, under direct presidential control. The new council was chaired by the
president; the chief of General Staff, the minister of internal affairs, and the police inspector
general were members. As part of the government reorganization in September 1990, Alhajji
Sumaila Gwarzo, formerly SSS director, was named to the new post of minister of state, police
affairs.

In late 1986, the NPF was reorganized nationwide into seven area commands, which superseded
a command structure corresponding to each of the States of Nigeria. Each command was under a
commissioner of police and was further divided into police provinces and divisions under local
officers. NPF headquarters, which was also an area command, supervised and coordinated the
other area commands. Later these Area Commands were grouped under Zone Commands as
follows:

Zone 1, Headquartered Kano, with Kano, Kastina, and Jigawa Commands

Zone 2, Headquartered Lagos, with Lagos, and Ogun commands

Zone 3, Headquartered Yola, with Adamawa, and Gombe Commands

The 1986 NPF reorganization was occasioned by a public eruption of tensions between the
police and the army. A superintendent was suspended for a time for grumbling that the army had
usurped police functions and kept police pay low, and there were fights between police and army
officers over border patrol jurisdiction. The armed forces chief of staff announced a thorough
reorganization of the NPF into the seven new area commands and five directorates criminal
investigations, logistics, supplies, training, and operations under deputy inspectors general.
About 2,000 constables and 400 senior police officers were dismissed by mid-1987, leaving
senior police officers disgruntled.

In mid-1989 another NPF reorganization was announced after the AFRCs acceptance of a report
by Rear Admiral Murtala Nyako. In 1989 the NPF also created a Quick Intervention Force in
each state, separate from the mobile police units, specifically to monitor political events and to
quell unrest during the transition to civil rule. Each state unit of between 160 and 400 police was

                                        190
commanded by an assistant superintendent and equipped with vehicles, communications gear,
weapons, and crowd control equipment, including cane shields, batons, and tear gas.

A Federal Investigation and Intelligence Bureau was to be set up as the successor to the
Directorate of Intelligence and Investigation; three directorates were established for operations,
administration, and logistics, each headed by a deputy inspector general.

The Directorate of Operations was subdivided into four units under a deputy directoroperations,
training, communications, and the Mobile Police.

The Directorate of Administration was composed of an administration unit headed by an
assistant inspector general (AIG), and of budget and personnel units under commissioners.

The Directorate of Logistics had four units procurement, workshop/transport, supply, and
work/maintenance under AIGs. The zonal arrangements were retained. However, AIGs were
authorized to transfer officers up to the rank of chief superintendent, to set up provost units, to
deploy mobile units, and to promote officers between the ranks of sergeant and inspector.

The above three Directorates were renamed Departments

Criminal Investigation Department

D Department The Criminal Investigation Department (CID) is the highest criminal investigation
arm of the Nigeria Police NPF. The Department is headed by a Deputy Inspector-General (DIG).
Its primary functions include investigation and prosecution of serious and complex criminal
cases within and outside the Country. The Department also coordinates crime investigations
throughout the NPF. The CID is divided into sections, with most of them headed by
Commissioners of Police (CPs). The Sections are:

i. Administration

ii. Anti-Fraud Section

iii. The Central Criminal Registry (CCR)

iv. Special Anti-Robbery Squad (SARS)

v. X-Squad

vi. General Investigation

vii. Special Fraud Unit (SFU)

viii. Legal Section

ix. Forensic Science Laboratory

                                                             191
x. Interpol Liaison

xi. Homicide

xii. Anti-Human Trafficking Unit

xiii. Force Intelligence Bureau (FIB)

xiv. DCI Kaduna Annex

xv. Counter Terrorism Unit (CTU)

Police Mobile Force: The Police Mobile Force was established as a strike or Anti-riot unit under the
control of the Inspector-General of Police to counter incidents of civil disturbance. It is designated to take
over operations of major crisis where conventional police units cannot cope.There are presently 12
MOPOL Commands, MOPOLs 1 thru 12, controlling 52 Police Mobile Squadrons which are spread
amongst the 36 State Commands and Federal Capital Territory .

Supervision of the Nigeria Police

Three major Governmental Agencies oversee the control and supervision of the Nigerian Police
Force; ThePolice Service Commission, the Nigerian Police Council and Ministry of interior.

The Police Service Commission

The PSC is the civilian oversight body on the police. It is responsible for appointment,
promotion, and discipline of all police officers except the Inspector General of Police. It shall
collaborate, cooperate and work with all the stake holders, namely the police council with the
President of Nigeria as Chairman, all the Governors of the Federating States of Nigeria, the
Minister of Interior and the Inspector-General of Police as members to turn the police around and
enable it to meet the challenges of the 21st century

The Nigeria Police Council (NPC)

The Ministry of Interior.

4.0 SUMMARY

The Nigerian Police (NP) formerly The Nigeria Police Force is the principal law enforcement
agency in Nigeria with a staff strength of about 371,800. There are currently plans to increase the
force to 650,000, adding 280,000 new recruits to the existing 370,000. The NP is a very large
organization consisting of 36 State commands grouped into 12 zones and 7 administrative
organs. The agency is currently headed by IGP Ibrahim Kpotun Idris

5.0 CONCLUSION

                                                             192
· A police officer has the power to conduct in person all prosecutions before any court, whether
or not the information or complaint is laid in his name. (S.23 Police Act)
· A Police officer has the Power to arrest with or without warrant. S.24 Police Act)
· Power to search (S.28 Police Act)
· Power to detain and search suspected persons (S.29 Police Act)
· Power to take fingerprints
· Grant Bail of person arrested without warrant, with or without sureties, for a reasonable amount
to appear before a magistrate at the day, time and place mentioned in the recognisance.

The Code of Conduct and Professional Standards for Police Officers is to provide all members

for the Nigeria Police Force with a set of guiding principles and standards of behaviour while on

or  off-duty.

A Primary Responsibility of a Police Officer is to act as an official representative of government
who is required and trusted to work within the law. The fundamental duties of a police officer
include serving the community, safeguarding lives and property, protecting the innocent, keeping
the peace and ensuring the rights of all to liberty, equality and justice; In performing duties, a
police officer shall perform all duties impartially, without favour of affection or ill will and
without regard to status, sex, race, religion, political belief or aspiration. All citizens will be
treated equally with courtesy, consideration and dignity. They will conduct themselves both in
appearance and composure, in such a manner as to inspire confidence and respect for the position
of public trust they hold.

6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT.

1. Draw the organizational structure of the Nigeria police and briefly discuss the
various departments of this agency in the administration of justice.

2, Discuss the powers of the police and its roles as provided by the constitution.

7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READINGS

     James, John S. "Administration". Stroud's Judicial Dictionary of Words and Phrases.
         Sweet & Maxwell. London. 1971. SBN 421 14290 1. Page 68.

     Bar Council. Code of Conduct for the Bar of England and Wales. 5th Edition. Paras
         201(a)(ii) and (iii) and 202.

     G Glover Alexander. The Administration of Justice in Criminal Matters (In England and
         Wales). Cambridge University Press. First Published 1915. Reissued 1919. ISBN 978 0
         521 18348 2. Google Books.

     William H Morley. The Administration of Justice in British India; Its Past History and
         Present State: Comprising an Account of the Laws Peculiar to India. Williams and
         Norgate. 1858. Google Books.

                                                             193
 Miller, John. On the Administration of Justice in the British Colonies in the East-Indies.
    Parbury, Allen and Co. London, Leadenhall Street. 1828. Google Books.

UNIT 2: THE FEDERAL MINISTRY OF JUSTICE.

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Federal Ministry of Justice is the legal arm of the Federal Government of Nigeria, primarily
concerned with bringing cases before the judiciary that are initiated or assumed by the
government. The Federal Ministry of Justice is responsible for ensuring justice for all. It provides
a sound legal framework to maintain the rule of law as well as economic and social reform.
Some of the duties that fall within the realm of the ministry include the prosecution of criminal
case, Defence of civil suits, provision of legal advice to government organisations and
institutions, drafting of Bills, handling of complaints of breaches of Citizens' Rights, publication
of revised laws and White Papers for the Ministry of Justice.
To provide fair, timely, accessible, and equal justice for all Nigerians.

2.0 OBJECTIVES:

At the end of the unit you will be able to

*The role of federal? State ministry of justice

* Know the various departments in the ministry

* The role of the attorney general

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

It is headed by the Attorney General, who is also Minister of Justice. The Attorney General is
appointed by the President, and is assisted by a Permanent Secretary, who is a career civil
servant. As of November 2015, the Attorney General is Justice. Different departments in the
ministry are responsible for:

Public prosecution.

The Department of Public Prosecution is one of the main Stream Departments in the Federal

Ministry  of         Justice.               Its       primary  functions  include:

                                                 194
i. Proffering Legal Advice or Opinion to the Nigerian Police and other Law Enforcement

Agencies, Ministries and Extra-Ministerial Departments on criminal matters and letters

repertories               and                  extradition);

ii. Public prosecution of accused person in all court of competent jurisdiction including the High

Court, Federal High Court, Court of Appeal and Supreme Court within and outside the Federal

Capital                   Territory,           Abuja;

iii. Defending criminal action in courts of competent jurisdiction. on behalf of Honorable

Attorney General of the Federation such as entering Nolle-prosequi authorized, by the

Honorable' Attorney General of the Federation, Bail matters, Human Rights enforcement

actions etc., Trafficking in minors and young women from Nigeria for the purpose of sexual

exploitation;

iv. Presently the Department is headed by a Director who is supported by competent Lawyers

and            effective              support  staff.

v. By virtue of section 174 of the constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 as

(amended) which vests powers on the Honourable Attorney-General of the Federation to

institute, take over, continue or discontinue with matters in Nigerian Courts except Court

Martial. The Department of Public Prosecutions performs these functions on behalf of the

HAGF.

vi. Department of Public Prosecution handles petitions forwarded to the HAGF for intervention

as Chief Law officers of the Federation and Minister of Justice.

vii. The department of Public Prosecution provides legal advisory services to MDAs and

supervises External Prosecutors who are prosecuting criminal cases in various courts in the

country.

viii. Establishment of Complex Case Group (CCG) by the Assistance of the British Council in

2003;

     Citizens rights, Law reporting, Finance and administration, Planning, research and
         statistics, Legal drafting, International and comparative law, Civil litigation, Solicitors,
         Human resource management and Procurement.

A justice ministry or ministry of justice is a ministry or other government agency charged with
justice. The ministry is often headed by a minister for justice or secretary of justice or
secretary for justice; sometimes the head of a department of justice is entitled attorney
general. Specific duties may relate to organizing the justice system, overseeing the public
prosecutor and maintaining the legal system and public order. Some ministries have additional
responsibilities in related policy areas overseeing elections, directing the police, law reform. The
duties of the ministry of justice may in some countries be split from separate responsibilities of
an attorney generaloften responsible for the justice system and the interior minister (often
responsible for public order. Sometimes the prison system is separated into another government
department called Corrective Services.

Statutory duties

         By Section 195 of the 1999 Constitution of Nigeria, There shall be an Attorney-General
         for each State who shall be the Chief Law Officer of the State and a Commissioner for

                                                             195
         Justice of the government of that State pursuant to the above provision Also the Attorney
         General shall be the Head the Ministry of Justice, charged with the responsibility to
         provide a legal services and support for local law enforcement in the state and acts as the
         chief counsel in state litigation. In addition, the Attorney General Oversees law
         enforcement agencies.

Functions, powers and duties

The Attorney General is legal adviser to the Government and attends Government meetings. The
Attorney General advises the Government on the constitutional and legal issues which arise prior
to or at Government meetings, including whether proposed legislation complies with the
provisions of the Constitution, acts and treaties of the European Union, the European Convention
on Human Rights or other international treaties to which Ireland has acceded. The Attorney
General also advises as to whether the State can ratify international treaties and conventions. The
Attorney General represents the State in legal proceedings.

The Attorney General is legal adviser to each Government Department and certain public bodies.
The Attorney General is the representative of the public in all legal proceedings for the
enforcement of law and the assertion or protection of public rights. The Attorney General
defends the constitutionality of Bills referred to the Supreme Court under Article 26 of the
Constitution. The Attorney General is an ex officio member of the Council of State which the
President of Ireland can consult in relation to his exercise and performance of certain powers and
functions under the Constitution. The Attorney General also has functions in respect of the Law
Reform Commission under the Law Reform Commission Act 1975, in respect of legislative
programming as a member of the Legislation Committee which is chaired by the Government
Chief Whip. The Attorney General also has a function under the Coroners Act 1962 to direct a
coroner to hold an inquest where he considers that the circumstances of a person's death make
the holding of an inquest advisable. The Attorney General also has some limited statutory
functions, e.g. the Geneva Conventions Act 1962.

The Office of the Parliamentary Counsel and the Chief State Solicitor's Office are both
constituent parts of the Attorney General's Office. Accordingly, the principal legal functions
carried out by the Office as a whole are the provision of legal advice Advisory Counsel,
legislative drafting Parliamentary Counsel, the provision of litigation, conveyancing and other
transactional services Chief State Solicitor's Office.

Nolle prosequi Classical Latin: is legal term of art and a Latin legal phrase meaning be unwilling
to pursuea phrase amounting to do not prosecute. It is a phrase used in many common
lawcriminal prosecution contexts to describe a prosecutor's decision to voluntarily discontinue
criminal charges either before trial or before a verdict is rendered. It contrasts with an
involuntary dismissal.

                                                             196
4.0 SUMMARY

i. Proffering legal Advice on Criminal matters; Undertaking of public prosecution of accused
Person;
ii. Defending criminal action in courts of competent jurisdiction;
iii. Prompt and courteous handling of cases; Handling of extradition matters;
iv. Overseeing implementation of mutual legal assistance, agreement on criminal matters;
v. Assisting and encouraging the criminal law jurisprudence in intellectual circles;
vi. Overseeing and coordinating the work of other statutory prosecuting agencies.

5. 0 CONCLUSION

The Federal Ministry of Justice is responsible for ensuring justice for all. It provides a sound legal
framework to maintain the rule of law as well as economic and social reform. Some of the duties that
fall within the realm of the ministry include the prosecution of criminal case, Defence of civil suits,
provision of legal advice to government organisations and institutions, drafting of Bills, handling of
complaints of breaches of Citizens' Rights, publication of revised laws and White Papers for the Ministry
of Justice.

The Department performs the following functions as a key role-player in the administration of
criminal justice and effective execution of Government`s policy on crime:

    1. Rendering of legal advisory services to the Police, the State Security Services
         Department etc on criminal investigations and Prosecutions.

    2. Rendering of legal advice to Government Ministries, Agencies and Departments on
         crime-related issues and concerns.

    3. Monitoring and Supervision of Prosecutions by the Police and other prosecuting agencies
         in the Magistrate Courts.

    4. Preparation and filing of criminal Court processes to facilitate commencement of trial of
         offenders by the Courts.

    5. Prosecution of criminal cases in the High Courts and Magistrate Courts.
    6. Prosecution of Criminal Appeals in the High Courts, Court of Appeal and Supreme

         Court.
    7. Collation and utilization of crime-related data for the effective implementation and

         execution of Government`s policy on crime.

6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT:

How important is the ministry of justice both at the federal and state levels?

                                                             197
7.0 REFERENCES / FURTHER READING

 O. Hood Phillips. A First Book of English Law. Fourth Edition. Sweet & Maxwell. 1960. Chapter 2.
(These matters and things are discussed by the author in a chapter titled "The Administration of
Justice").

   McNair, Sir Arnold Duncan. Legal Effects of War. Second Edition. Cambridge University
Press. 1944. Page 356.

   Card, Richard. Card, Cross and Jones: Criminal Law. Twelfth Edition. Butterworths. 1992.
ISBN 0 406 00086 7. Chapter 16.

   Blackstone's Statutes on Criminal Law: 2004-2005. Fourteenth Edition. Part XIII

UNIT 3 : THE JUDICIARY

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Nigerian Judicature is made up of the regulatory institutions, courts/tribunals, judicial
processes, judges and non-judge workers, the inter-phasing agency of law enforcement centers
and Prisons or other holding centers. Together they all uphold the idea of effective justice
administration for the benefit of citizens and other stakeholders connected to the Nigerian
sovereignty which is the primary justification for a judicial arm of government.

The Judiciary arm of government is responsible for interpreting the law of the land, while
applying it in situations where they are necessary; this makes the job of the Judiciary a very
critical one. The law of the land constitutes the bases upon which judgments are ruled; it is
therefore fundamental that its interpretation and application be carried out with absolute alacrity
and meticulousness. The Nigerian Judicial System comprises of the Body of Benchers` and the
Bar` itself. The Body of Benchers is a collection of the highest ranking legal practitioners in the
country which is headed by the Chief Justice of the Federation. It also has as its members the
respective Chief Judges of the States of the Federation and certain very reputable lawyers in the
country, whereas the Bar is a body of all the barristers in the country. These together constitute
the Nigerian Legal Class. The Nigerian Judicial System has come a long way, taking its origin
from the colonial era. It was saddled with the responsibility of checking the activities of the
Executive and Legislative arms of government. The Judiciary as a matter of fact, plays a very
vital role in the development of the country considering the fact it is the mechanism that oversees

                                                             198
to the usage and management of power in the country. If the power that is vested on the
Executive and Legislative offices is not checked, the bulk of the citizenry will have lots of
troubles and challenges to contend with.

The primary responsibility of the Judiciary is to ensure that the Executive and Legislative arms
of government function within the ambits of the constitutional provisions made available to
them. The Judiciary ought to stand isolated while performing its constitutional duty. It does not
need any interference from the Executive or Legislature in carrying out its primary assignment. It
operates independent of any external disturbances and functions with the constitutional power
vested in its office. The Nigerian Judicial System has had lots of challenges to contend with.
During the shambolic military era, the Judiciary was subjected to abject emasculation to the
extent that it lost the substance to its name and only existed as a nomenclatural entity. To say the
least, the Judiciary sank into oblivion`. But with the advent of democracy came an organized
political façade that accorded the Judiciary its rightful place as the watchdog of the polity. The
importance of the Judiciary in any political system cannot be over-emphasized, hence the
constitution provides for its absolute independence to enable it perform its sacred constitutional
function without sentiments and reservations .

2.0 OBJECTIVES

Judiciary is an indispensable organ of government. Its importance cannot be over emphasized.
Any society without a judiciary system is bound to face chaos and anarchy. In a nation where the
judiciary is weak or not independent its people might be confronted with injustice and all kinds
of intimidation. The judiciary organ performs several roles to ensure stability of a society. Some
of its statutory functions amongst others include: conflicts resolution, punish people who violate
the laws of the land, interpret the constitution of the land and check the activities of the other
organs of the government namely: the executive and legislature.Thus absence of judiciary system
could create uncomfortable situation in any given country. Democracy as the government of the
masses cannot stand in such as a country.

According to section 6(1) of the Constitution, The Judicial powers of the Federation shall be

vested in the courts to which this section relates, being courts established for the Federation. On

the other hand, section 6(2) provides that: the judicial powers of a State shall be vested in the

courts to which this section relates, being courts established, subject as provided by this

Constitution,       for       a  State.

That however is not the end. The Constitution further underscores the separateness of Federal

Courts and State Courts by the delimitation it provided in its Chapter 7 which is headed The

Judicature`. Whilst Part I of the Chapter is headed Federal Courts`, Part II is headed State

Court`. Under the Federal Courts, we have the Supreme Court of Nigeria, the Court of Appeal,

the Federal High Court, the National Industrial Court of Nigeria, the High Court of the Federal

Capital Territory, Abuja, the Sharia Court of Appeal of the FCT and the Customary Court of

Appeal of the FCT.

Democracy as defined by ex-President Abraham Lincoln is the government of the people by the
people and for the people. Hence in a weak judiciary system, the people cannot enjoy the
dividends of democracy. Several weeks before the National chapter of the Judiciary Staff Union

                         199
of Nigeria (JUSUN) declared a nationwide strike the workers in Rivers judiciary are on strike.
The strike no doubt has negative effect on the administration of justice in the country.The long
closure of the courts could force people who have grievances to seek justice else where other
than the constitutional means of looking for redress in law courts.

Ineffective judiciary system is capable of throwing the entire nation into confusion. A moribund
judiciary organ is not healthy for the development of democracy in Nigeria. This is a country
where there are cracks in most of the sectors. Nigeria is a democratic nation; therefore for
democracy to drive well there must be an independent judiciary. There is a close relationship
between judiciary and democracy. Government and relevant authorities should do something
about the striking judiciary staff so that courts will resume sitting to dispense justice. This will
reduce unnecessary tension in the country.

Both the suspended 1979 constitution and the never implemented 1989 constitutions, as well as
the new constitution promulgated on May 29, 1999 provide for an independent judiciary. In
practice, the judiciary is subject to executive and legislative branch pressure, influence by
political leaders at both the state and federal levels, and suffers from corruption and inefficiency.

Under the 1999 constitution, the regular court system comprises federal and state trial courts,
state appeals courts, the Federal Court of Appeal, the Federal Supreme Court, and Shari'ah
Islamic and customary traditional courts of appeal for each state and for the federal capital
territory of Abuja. Courts of the first instance include magistrate or district courts, customary or
traditional courts, Shari'ah courts, and for some specified cases, the state high courts. In
principle, customary and Shari'ah courts have jurisdiction only if both plaintiff and defendant
agree, but fear of legal costs, delays, and distance to alternative venues encourage many litigants
to choose these courts.

Trials in the regular court system are public and generally respect constitutionally protected
individual rights, including a presumption of innocence, the right to be present, to confront
witnesses, to present evidence, and to be represented by legal counsel. However, low
compensation for judges, understaffing, poor equipment, bribery, special settlements, and a host
of developmental factors decrease the reliability and impartiality of the courts.

Under the Abubakar Government, military tribunals continued to operate outside the
constitutional court system, but they were used less and less frequently as military rule waned;
the tribunals officially were disbanded by the implementation of the new constitution and the
return to civilian rule. The tribunals had in the past been used to try both military personnel and
civilians accused of various crimes, but groups asserted that these tribunals failed to meet
internationally accepted standards for fair trial.

In October 1999, the governor of Zamfara signed into law two bills passed by the state
legislature aimed at instituting Shari'ah law in the state. As a result, school children are now
being segregated by sex in Zamfara schools, some public transportation, and some health
facilities. There were fears among non-Muslims that despite legal provisions, women and other
groups would be subjected to discrimination in Shari'ah courts. As of early 2003, eleven other
northern states had adopted various forms or adaptations of Shari'ah law, including: Sokoto,

                                                             200
Kebbi, Niger, Kano, Katsiana, Kaduna, Jigawa, Yobe, Bauchi, Borno, and Gombe. Some of
these states have already issued sentences of public caning for consumption of alcohol,
amputations for stealing, and death by stoning for committing adultery.

The hierarchy of Courts in Nigeria {ascending}

The hierarchy of courts is the arrangement of courts in the method through which appeal flows.
If the judgement at the lower court is not satisfying, an appeal can be made to the higher court in
order to get redress and justice. I would highlight the courts starting from the lowest.

Magistrate/ District Courts

This is just a single court, it transforms to a magistrate court in the hearing of a criminal case
while in the hearing of a civil case it becomes a district court. These are courts that are regarded
as courts of inferior jurisdiction. There are two adduced reasons for this. Firstly, it is not listed
among the courts in S.6(5)(a) ­ (i) of the 1999 Constitution. And section S.6(3) provides that the
courts that are mentioned in the previous section are courts of superior record. By implication,
courts that are not mentioned are courts of inferior record. The second reason for this is that they
cannot punish contempt ex facci curria.

The decisions of magistrate courts are bound by decisions of the higher courts but their own
decisions do not bind any court. Also, they are not bound any of their previous decisions.

The High Court/Sharia/Customary Court Of Appeal

Directly above the district/magistrate court, you would find the High Courts, Customary Court of
Appeal and Sharia Court of Appeal. Pursuant to S.6(5) of the 1999 Constitution, we have federal
high court, state high court and the high court of the federal capital territory. Of these three, the
state high court has the widest jurisdiction. It should be noted that customary and sharia courts
of appeal are not bound by judicial precedent. This is because they are not of common law
origin. Also, they hear appeals on cases from the area courts. While the high court hears from the
magistrate court.

These courts are referred to as courts of co-ordinate jurisdiction therefore, they are not bound by
previous decisions of another high court. At best, the decision of another high court is persuasive
on another high court. However, it is not expected for a high court to depart from another high
court`s decision except in good cause.

A state high court, unlike the federal high court, has wider jurisdiction. In the provision of S.251
of the constitution, you would be able to see the limited jurisdiction placed on the Federal High
Court. Thus, if a state high court makes a decision on a matter of federal application, it binds all
magistrate courts in the country. If it makes a decision on matters of state application, it only
binds courts of inferior jurisdiction in the state.

Court of Appeal

                                                             201
Directly above the high court is the court of appeal. There is only one court of appeal in Nigeria
but it has different divisions over the country. Thus, decisions by the court of appeal in Ilorin
division is treated as its own decision in the court of appeal Lagos state. The question then is
how does the court of appeal deal with judicial precedent?

It is trite that the court of appeal is bound by decisions of the supreme court. However, in dealing
with decisions of a court of appeal in another division, the court of appeal is bound to an extent.
In civil cases, it is bound by the decision of another court of appeal except in the situations
provided for in the case of Young vs Bristol Aeroplane Co:

· If the decision is given per incuriam

· If there are two or more conflicting decisions of different courts of appeals, it can follow either
of them or choose to follow none of them.

· When a decision of a court of appeal is in contrast with a decision of the Supreme court.

However, in criminal matters, a court of appeal is not bound to follow the decisions of other
courts of appeals. This is because of the very nature of criminal law in which each case should be
treated on its merit. Strictly following a previous decision could lead to irreparable damage. This
may be due to the fact that it is better for the court to set free 10 guilty persons than to convict a
single innocent person.

The supreme Court

This is the highest court in the land and its decisions on any matter is final. Its decisions are
binding on all courts throughout the country. The supreme court is not bound by any previous
decision of any court anywhere. However, it follows its previous decisions in order to maintain
certainty and uniformity in the administration of justice. The supreme court may, however,
choose to depart from its previous decisions in the following situation:

· If the previous decision is given per incuriam

· If following the previous decision would lead to substantial injustice.

· When a legislation nullifies the decision made in the previous judgement. see Bucknor Maclean
vs Inlaks Nig Ltd 1980 where the court departed from its decision in two previous cases: Shell
BP vs Jammal Engineering Ltd and Owumi vs Paterson Zochonis and co Ltd due to the fact that
adherence to these precedents could lead to substantial injustice.

· If it is faced with two previous conflicting decisions of its own, it can choose to follow anyone.

In the case of Odi vs Osafile the court reasoned that the law was made for man and not man for
the law. Also, man isn`t infallible and so are his thoughts. Therefore if it is pointed out that there
has been a substantial error in a previous decision, the court should have the jurisdiction to
correct.

                                                             202
Not to be confused with Precedence or President.

In legal systems based on common law, a precedent, or authority, is a principle or rule
established in a previous legal case that is either binding on or persuasive for a court or other
tribunal when deciding subsequent cases with similar issues or facts. Common law legal systems
place great value on deciding cases according to consistent principled rules so that similar facts
will yield similar and predictable outcomes, and observance of precedent is the mechanism by
which that goal is attained. The principle by which judges are bound to precedents is known as
stare decisis. Black's Law Dictionary defines precedent as a rule of law established for the first
time by a court for a particular type of case and thereafter referred to in deciding similar cases.
Common law precedent is a third kind of law, on equal footing with statutory lawstatutes and
codes enacted by legislative bodies), and Delegated legislationin U.K. parlance or regulatory law
in U.S. parlance regulations promulgated by executive branch agencies.

Case law, in common law jurisdictions, is the set of decisions of adjudicatory tribunals or other
rulings that can be cited as precedent. In most countries, including most European countries, the
term is applied to any set of rulings on law which is guided by previous rulings, for example,
previous decisions of a government agency.

Essential to the development of case law is the publication and indexing of decisions for use by
lawyers, courts and the general public, in the form of law reports. While all decisions are
precedent though at varying levels of authority, some become leading cases or landmark
decisions" that are cited especially often.

Stare decisis Anglo-Latin pronunciationis a legal principle by which judges are obligated to
respect the precedent established by prior decisions. The words originate from the phrasing of
the principle in the Latin maxim Stare decisis et non quieta movere: to stand by decisions and
not disturb the undisturbed. In a legal context, this is understood to mean that courts should
generally abide by precedent and not disturb settled matters. The principle of stare decisis can be
divided into two components.

The first is the rule that a decision made by a superior court, or by the same court in an earlier
decision, is binding precedent that the court itself and all its inferior courts are obligated to
follow. The second is the principle that a court should not overturn its own precedent unless
there is a strong reason to do so and should be guided by principles from lateral and inferior
courts. The second principle, regarding persuasive precedent, is an advisory one that courts can
and do ignore occasionally.

Case law in common law systems

In the common law tradition, courts decide the law applicable to a case by interpreting statutes
and applying precedent which record how and why prior cases have been decided. Unlike most
civil law systems, common law systems follow the doctrine of stare decisis, by which most
courts are bound by their own previous decisions in similar cases, and all lower courts should
make decisions consistent with previous decisions of higher courts.[4] For example, in England,
the High Court and the Court of Appeal are each bound by their own previous decisions, but the

                                                             203
Supreme Court of the United Kingdom is able to deviate from its earlier decisions, although in
practice it rarely does so.

Generally speaking, higher courts do not have direct oversight over day-to-day proceedings in
lower courts, in that they cannot reach out on their own initiative (sua sponte) at any time to
reverse or overrule judgments of the lower courts. Normally, the burden rests with litigants to
appeal rulings (including those in clear violation of established case law) to the higher courts. If
a judge acts against precedent and the case is not appealed, the decision will stand.

A lower court may not rule against a binding precedent, even if the lower court feels that the
precedent is unjust; the lower court may only express the hope that a higher court or the
legislature will reform the rule in question. If the court believes that developments or trends in
legal reasoning render the precedent unhelpful, and wishes to evade it and help the law evolve,
the court may either hold that the precedent is inconsistent with subsequent authority, or that the
precedent should be distinguished by some material difference between the facts of the cases. If
that judgment goes to appeal, the appellate court will have the opportunity to review both the
precedent and the case under appeal, perhaps overruling the previous case law by setting a new
precedent of higher authority. This may happen several times as the case works its way through
successive appeals. Lord Denning, first of the High Court of Justice, later of the Court of Appeal,
provided a famous example of this evolutionary process in his development of the concept of
estoppel starting in the High Trees case: Central London Property Trust Ltd v. High Trees
House Ltd [1947] K.B. 130.

Judges may refer to various types of persuasive authority to reach a decision in a case. Widely
cited non-binding sources include legal encyclopedias such as Corpus Juris Secundum and
Halsbury's Laws of England, or the published work of the Law Commission or the American
Law Institute. Some bodies are given statutory powers to issue Guidance with persuasive
authority or similar statutory effect, such as the Highway Code.

In federal or multi-jurisdictional law systems there may exist conflicts between the various lower
appellate courts. Sometimes these differences may not be resolved and it may be necessary to
distinguish how the law is applied in one district, province, division or appellate department.
Usually only an appeal accepted by the court of last resort will resolve such differences and, for
many reasons, such appeals are often not granted.

Any court may seek to distinguish its present case from that of a binding precedent, in order to
reach a different conclusion. The validity of such a distinction may or may not be accepted on
appeal. An appellate court may also propound an entirely new and different analysis from that of
junior courts, and may or may not be bound by its own previous decisions, or in any case may
distinguish the decisions based on significant differences in the facts applicable to each case. Or,
a court may view the matter before it as one of first impression, not governed by any controlling
precedent.

Where there are several members of a court, there may be one or more judgments given; only the
ratio decidendi of the majority can constitute a binding precedent, but all may be cited as
persuasive, or their reasoning may be adopted in argument. Quite apart from the rules of

                                                             204
precedent, the weight actually given to any reported judgment may depend on the reputation of
both the court and the judges.

RULES OF INTERPRETATION

Statutory interpretation is the process by which courts interpret and apply legislation. Some
amount of interpretation is often necessary when a case involves a statute. Sometimes the words
of a statute have a plain and straightforward meaning. But in many cases, there is some
ambiguity or vagueness in the words of the statute that must be resolved by the judge. To find
the meanings of statutes, judges use various tools and methods of statutory interpretation,
including traditional canons of statutory interpretation, legislative history, and purpose. In
common law jurisdictions, the judiciary may apply rules of statutory interpretation both to
legislation enacted by the legislature and to delegated legislation such as administrative agency
regulations.

The judiciary interprets how legislation should apply in a particular case as no legislation
unambiguously and specifically addresses all matters. Legislation may contain uncertainties for a
variety of reasons:

     Words are imperfect symbols to communicate intent. They are ambiguous and change in
         meaning over time. (The word 'let' used to mean 'prevent' or hinderand now means allow. The
          word 'peculiar' is used to mean both specific and unusual, e.g. kangaroos are peculiar to
          Australia, and it's very peculiar to see a kangaroo outside Australia.

     Unforeseen situations are inevitable, and new technologies and cultures make application of
         existing laws difficult. (Is e-mail subject to the same protection as documents held by a person,
         or is it considered less protected since it is in the hands of a third party?

     Uncertainties may be added to the statute in the course of enactment, such as the need for
         compromise or catering to special interest groups.

Literal rule : The literal rule of statutory interpretation should be the first rule applied
by judges. Under the literal rule, the words of the statute are given their natural or
ordinary meaning and applied without the judge seeking to put a gloss on the words or
seek to make sense of the statute.

The plain meaning rule, also known as the literal rule, is one of three rules of statutory construction
traditionally applied by English courts. The other two are the mischief rule"and the "golden rule".

The plain meaning rule dictates that statutes are to be interpreted using the ordinary meaning of
the language of the statute. In other words, a statute is to be read word for word and is to be
interpreted according to the ordinary meaning of the language, unless a statute explicitly defines
some of its terms otherwise or unless the result would be cruel or absurd. Ordinary words are
given their ordinary meaning, technical terms are given their technical meaning, and local,
cultural terms are recognized as applicable. The plain meaning rule is the mechanism that

                                                             205
prevents courts from taking sides in legislative or political issues.Additionally, it is the
mechanism that underlies textualism and, to a certain extent, originalism.

Golden Rule: In law, the golden rule, or British rule, is a form of statutory construction
traditionally applied by English courts. The other two are the "plain meaning rule" (also known
as the literal rule and the mischief rule. The golden rule allows a judge to depart from a word's
normal meaning in order to avoid an absurd result.

The term golden rule seems to have originated in an 1854 court ruling, and implies a degree of
enthusiasm for this particular rule of construction over alternative rules that has not been shared
by all subsequent judges. For example, one judge made a point of including this note in a 1940
decision: The golden rule is that the words of a statute must prima facie be given their ordinary
meaning.

Mischief Rule: The mischief rule is one of three rules of statutory interpretation traditionally
applied by English courts. The other two are the plain meaning rulealso known as the literal rule
and the golden rule.The main aim of the rule is to determine the mischief and defect that the
statute in question has set out to remedy, and what ruling would effectively implement this
remedy. In applying the mischief rule, the court is essentially asking what part of the law did the
law not cover, but was meant to be rectified by Parliament in passing the bill.The rule was first
laid out in a 16th-century ruling of the Exchequer Court.

Therefore, the court must try to determine how a statute should be enforced. This requires
statutory construction. It is a tenet of statutory construction that the legislature is supreme
assuming constitutionality when creating law and that the court is merely an interpreter of the
law. Nevertheless, in practice, by performing the construction the court can make sweeping
changes in the operation of the law.

Statutory interpretation refers to the process by which a court looks at a statute and determines
what it means. A statute, which is a bill or law passed by the legislature, imposes obligations and
rules on the people. Statutes, however, although they make the law, may be open to
interpretation and have ambiguities. Statutory interpretation is the process of resolving those
ambiguities and deciding how a particular bill or law will apply in a particular case.

Assume, for example, that a statute mandates that all motor vehicles travelling on a public
roadway must be registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles . If the statute does not
define the term "motor vehicles, then that term will have to be interpreted if questions arise in a
court of law. A person driving a motorcycle might be pulled over and the police may try to fine
him if his motorcycle is not registered with the DMV. If that individual argued to the court that a
motorcycle is not a motor vehicle then the court would have to interpret the statute to determine
what the legislature meant by motor vehicle and whether or not the motorcycle fell within that
definition and was covered by the statute.

There are numerous rules of statutory interpretation. The first and most important rule is the rule
dealing with the statute's plain language. This rule essentially states that the statute means what it
says. If, for example, the statute says "motor vehicles", then the court is most likely to construe

                                                             206
that the legislation is referring to the broad range of motorised vehicles normally required to
travel along roadways and not aeroplanes or bicycles even though aeroplanes are vehicles
propelled by a motor and bicycles may be used on a roadway.

4.0 SUMMARY

Judicial independence can be defined as the total freedom of the judicial arm from the other two
arms (Executive and Legislature) of government. The purpose of this is to ensure the
entrenchment of democracy.

Independence protects the judicial institution from the Executive and from the Legislature. As
such, it lies at the very heart of the separation of powers. Other arms of governance are
accountable to the people, but the Judiciary ­ and the Judiciary alone ­ is accountable to a higher
value and to standards of judicial rectitude.[10] It is on this basis that the United Nations adopted
basic principles on the independence of the judiciary.[11] That is, before it can be held that the
judiciary is truly independent, these principles have to be in place. These principles are;

The independence of the Judiciary shall be guaranteed by the State and enshrined in the
Constitution or the law of the country. It is the duty of all governmental and other institutions to
respect and observe the independence of the Judiciary.

The judiciary shall decide matters before them impartially, on the basis of facts and in
accordance with the law, without any restrictions, improper influences, inducements, pressures,
threats or interferences, direct or indirect, from any quarter or for any reason.

The judiciary have jurisdiction over all issues of a judicial nature and shall have exclusive
authority to decide whether an issue submitted for its decision is within its competence as
defined by law.

There shall not be any inappropriate or unwarranted interference with the judicial process, nor
shall judicial decisions by the court be subject to revision. The principle is without prejudice to
judicial review or to mitigation or commutation by competent authorities of sentences imposed
by the judiciary, in accordance with the law.

Everyone shall have the right to be tried by ordinary courts or tribunals using established legal
procedures. Tribunals that do not use the duly established procedures of the legal process shall
not be created to displace the jurisdiction belonging to the ordinary courts or judicial tribunals.

The principle of the independence of the judiciary entitles and requires the judiciary to ensure
that judicial proceedings are conducted fairly and that the rights of the parties are respected.

It is the duty of each Member State to provide adequate resources to enable the judiciary to
properly perform its functions.

5.0 CONCLUSION

                                                             207
It is an incontestable fact that the judiciary occupies a pre-eminent position in the administration
of justice not only in Nigeria but in every sane society where there is respect for the rule of law
as opposed to rule by brute force. It therefore follows that the independence of judiciary is
necessary for the sustenance of the Rule of Law and Democracy.Condition of service of judicial
officers should be reviewed to attract the best brains to the bench.

The constitution should be amended to ensure that it provides for financial autonomy of the
judiciary by establishing a provision for a capital expenditure for the judiciary. The court system
should be made more sovereign, liable, proficient, neutral, reachable, affordable and trustworthy,
especially as regard removal of judges. Efficient mechanisms should be put in place to ensure
enforcement of court rulings against government, like a regulatory body. The Judiciary should be
allocated a good percentage of the income of the State. And democratic institutions should be
strengthened to make them effective, independent and accountable.

6.0 TUTORED MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Discuss the constitutional role of the judiciary in Nigeria and what are challenges confronting the
effective administration of justice today?

7.0 REFERENCE FOR FURTHER READINGS

Textual canons are rules of thumb for understanding the words of the text. Some of the canons
are still known by their traditional Latin names.

Plain meaning

         When writing statutes, the legislature intends to use ordinary English words in their
         ordinary senses. The United States Supreme Court discussed the plain meaning rule in
         Caminetti v. United States,242 U.S. 470 (1917), reasoning [i]t is elementary that the
         meaning of a statute must, in the first instance, be sought in the language in which the act
         is framed, and if that is plain... the sole function of the courts is to enforce it according to
         its terms." And if a statute's language is plain and clear, the Court further warned that "the
         duty of interpretation does not arise, and the rules which are to aid doubtful meanings
         need no discussion."

Rule against surplusage

         Where one reading of a statute would make one or more parts of the statute redundant
         and another reading would avoid the redundancy, the other reading is preferred.

Eiusdem generis ("of the same kinds, class, or nature")

                                                             208
         When a list of two or more specific descriptors is followed by more general descriptors,
         the otherwise wide meaning of the general descriptors must be restricted to the same
         class, if any, of the specific words that precede them. For example, where "cars, motor
         bikes, motor powered vehicles" are mentioned, the word "vehicles" would be interpreted
         in a limited sense (therefore vehicles cannot be interpreted as including airplanes).

Expressio unius est exclusio alterius ("the express mention of one thing excludes all others")

         Items not on the list are impliedly assumed not to be covered by the statute or a contract
         term. However, sometimes a list in a statute is illustrative, not exclusionary. This is
         usually indicated by a word such as "includes" or "such as."

In pari materiaupon the same matter or subject

         When a statute is ambiguous, its meaning may be determined in light of other statutes on
         the same subject matter.

Noscitur a sociis ("a word is known by the company it keeps

         When a word is ambiguous, its meaning may be determined by reference to the rest of the
         statute.

Reddendo singula singulis or referring each to each

         When a will says I devise and bequeath all my real and personal property to A", the
         principle of reddendo singula singulis would apply as if it read "I devise all my real
         property, and bequeath all my personal property, to A", since the word devise is
         appropriate only to real property and the term bequeath is appropriate only to personal
         property.

Generalia specialibus non derogant ("the general does not detract from the specific.

Substantive. Substantive canons instruct the court to favor interpretations that promote certain
values or policy results.
Charming Betsy Canon . National statute must be construed so as not to conflict with
international law. See Murray v. The Charming Betsy, 6 U.S. (2 Cranch) 64 (1804): It has also
been observed that an act of Congress ought never to be construed to violate the law of nations if
any other possible construction remains...

Interpretation in Light of Fundamental Values . Statute does not violate fundamental societal
values. See, for example, Holy Trinity Church v. United States,[13] or Coco v The Queen.
However, legislation that is intended to be consistent with fundamental rights can be overridden
by clear and unambiguous language.[15]

                                                             209
Rule of Lenity . In construing an ambiguous criminal statute, the court should resolve the
ambiguity in favor of the defendant. See McNally v. United States, 483 U.S. 350 (1987); See,
e.g., Muscarello v. U.S., 524 U.S. 125 (1998) (declining to apply the rule of lenity); Evans v.
U.S., 504 U.S. 255 (1992) (Thomas, J., dissenting); Scarborough v. U.S., 431 U.S. 563 (1977)
(Stewart, J., dissenting); See United States v. Santos (2008).

Avoidance of abrogation of state sovereignty . See Gregory v. Ashcroft;] see also Gonzales v.
Oregon; see also Nevada Dept. of Human Resources v. Hibbs, except where such would deprive
the defendant of bedrock, foundational rights that the Federal Government intended to be the
minimum floor that the states were not allowed to fall beneath; Dombrowski v Pfister.[21]

"Indian" Canon . National statute must be construed in favor of Native Americans. See
Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 534 U.S. 84 (2001): "statutes are to be construed liberally in
favor of Indians with ambiguous provisions interpreted to their benefit." This canon can be
likened to the doctrine of contra proferentem in contract law.

UNIT 4: THE NIGERIAN PRISONS

1.0 INTRODUCTION

In modern republics, the function of prison is said to be correction. When individuals break laws
that uphold the common good, the conventional wisdom goes, they need to be punished or
otherwise taught to be more socially cooperative and generous. However, the only thing that
prison teaches is obedience. A corrected citizen is one who internalizes prison bars even on the
streets.

Prison serves as a constant threat against all who would oppose what governments and
corporations do with our collective resources. A critic might point out that prison is only a threat
to dissidents who break the law, but what it comes down to is that there are no legal means to
fundamentally change the government. Elections are simply a Darwinian means of weeding out
representatives (of the elite) whose populist rhetoric is less convincing. If all you want from your
government is some new gun law or corporate accountability standard, you may find your
democracy fulfilling (provided you can muster about a hundred thousand person-hours of
volunteer work, two hundred thousand dollars of donations, and provided the corporations or
resident religious fundamentalists in the government don`t put up too much of a fight, and also
provided you don`t mind that these new rules will be bent occasionally for the rich and
powerful). But if what you want is a society that values human and environmental interests over
Machiavellian state and corporate interests, and most people do at some level, then you`re out of

                                                             210
luck; your government will not represent you. There is no consent of the governed; we were all
born subjects, whereas the government is not born out of our initiative or participation. In fact, it
functions best without us. If the only option you have is to consent, that`s not consensus: it`s
submission

2.0 OBJECTIVE:

At the end of this unit you should be able to know

*the origin of the Nigeria prisons

*Types of prisons in Nigeria

*the structure of the Nigerian prison and other prisons

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

A prison, correctional facility, detention center, jail, gaol, penitentiary or remand centre is a
facility in which inmates are forcibly confined and denied a variety of freedoms under the
authority of the state. Prisons are most commonly used within a criminal justice system: people
charged with crimes may be imprisoned until they are brought to trial; those pleading or being
found guilty of crimes at trial may be sentenced to a specified period of imprisonment. Besides
their use for punishing crimes, jails and prisons are frequently used by authoritarian regimes
against perceived opponents.

The term prison or penitentiary is often used to describe institutions that incarcerate people for
longer periods of time, such as many years, while jail is often used to describe institutions
focused on confining people for shorter periods of time (e.g. for shorter sentences or while
waiting for trial / sentencing). Prisons often have facilities that are more designed with long term
confinement in mind in comparison to jails.

Prisons can be used as a tool of political repression to punish what are deemed political crimes,
often without trial or other legal due process; this use is illegal under most forms of international
law governing fair administration of justice. In times of war, prisoners of war or detainees may
be detained in military prisons or prisoner of war camps, and large groups of civilians might be
imprisoned in internment camps..

The legal definition of Prison, is that, it is a place used for confinement of convicted criminals.
Aside from the death penalty, a sentence to prison is the harshest punishment imposed on
criminals in the United States. On the federal level, imprisonment or incarceration is managed by
the Federal Bureau of Prisons, a federal agency within the DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE. State prisons
are supervised by a state agency such as a department of corrections. Confinement in prison, also
known as a penitentiary or correctional facility, is the punishment that courts most commonly
impose for serious crimes, such as felonies. For lesser crimes, courts usually impose short-term
incarceration in a jail, detention center, or similar facility.

                                                             211
Confining criminals for long periods of time as the primary form of punishment is a relatively
new concept. Throughout history, various countries have imprisoned criminal offenders, but
imprisonment was usually reserved for pre-trial detention or punishment of petty criminals with
a short term of confinement. Using long-term imprisonment as the primary punishment for
convicted criminals began in the United States. In the late eighteenth century, the nonviolent
Quakers in Pennsylvania proposed long-term confinement as an alternative to Capital
Punishment. The Quakers stressed solitude, silence, rehabilitation, hard work, and religious faith.
Confinement was originally intended not only as a punishment but as an opportunity for renewal
through religion.

History

The use of prisons can be traced back to the rise of the state as a form of social organization.
Corresponding with the advent of the state was the development of written language, which
enabled the creation of formalized legal codes as official guidelines for society. The best known
of these early legal codes is the Code of Hammurabi, written in Babylon around 1750 BC. The
penalties for violations of the laws in Hammurabi's Code were almost exclusively centered on
the concept of lex talionis the law of retaliation, whereby people were punished as a form of
vengeance, often by the victims themselves. This notion of punishment as vengeance or
retaliation can also be found in many other legal codes from early civilizations, including the
ancient Sumerian codes, the Indian Manama Dharma Astra, the Hermes Trismegistus of Egypt,
and the Israelite Mosaic Law.

A common punishment in Early Modern Europe was to be made a galley slave. The galley
pictured here belonged to the Mediterranean fleet of Louis XIV, c.1694.

Some Ancient Greek philosophers, such as Plato, began to develop ideas of using punishment to
reform offenders instead of simply using it as retribution. Imprisonment as a penalty was used
initially for those who could not afford to pay their fines. Eventually, since impoverished
Athenians could not pay their fines, leading to indefinite periods of imprisonment, time limits
were set instead. The prison in Ancient Athens was known as the desmoterion place of chains.

The Romans were among the first to use prisons as a form of punishment, rather than simply for
detention. A variety of existing structures were used to house prisoners, such as metal cages,
basements of public buildings, and quarries. One of the most notable Roman prisons was the
Mamertine Prison, established around 640 B.C. by Ancus Marcius. The Mamertine Prison was
located within a sewer system beneath ancient Rome and contained a large network of dungeons
where prisoners were held in squalid conditions[8], contaminated with human waste. Forced labor
on public works projects was also a common form of punishment. In many cases, citizens were
sentenced to slavery, often in ergastula (a primitive form of prison where unruly slaves were
chained to workbenches and performed hard labor.

                                                             212
Middle Ages to the 17th century

During the Middle Ages in Europe, castles, fortresses, and the basements of public buildings
were often used as makeshift prisons. The possession of the right and the capability to imprison
citizens, however, granted an air of legitimacy to officials at all levels of government, from kings
to regional courts to city councils; and the ability to have someone imprisoned or killed served as
a signifier of who in society possessed power or authority over others. Another common
punishment was sentencing people to galley slavery, which involved chaining prisoners together
in the bottoms of ships and forcing them to row on naval or merchant vessels.

However, the concept of the modern prison largely remained unknown until the early 19th-
century. Punishment usually consisted of physical forms of punishment, including capital
punishment, mutilation, flagellation whipping, branding, and non-physical punishments, such as
public shaming rituals (like the stocks From the Middle Ages up to the 16th and 17th centuries in
Europe, imprisonment was rarely used as a punishment in its own right, and prisons were mainly
to hold those awaiting trial and convicts awaiting punishment.

However, an important innovation at the time was the Bridewell House of Corrections, located at
Bridewell Palace in London, which resulted in the building of other houses of correction. These
houses held mostly petty offenders, vagrants, and the disorderly local poor. In these facilities,
inmates were given jobs, and through prison labor they were taught how to work for a living. By
the end of the 17th century, houses of correction were absorbed into local prison facilities under
the control of the local justice of the peace.

Modern era

From the late 17th century and during the 18th century, popular resistance to public execution
and torture became more widespread both in Europe and in the United States. Particularly under
the Bloody Code, with few sentencing alternatives, imposition of the death penalty for petty
crimes, such as theft, was proving increasingly unpopular with the public; many jurors were
refusing to convict defendants of petty crimes when they knew the defendants would be
sentenced to death. Rulers began looking for means to punish and control their subjects in a way
that did not cause people to associate them with spectacles of tyrannical and sadistic violence.
They developed systems of mass incarceration, often with hard labor, as a solution. The prison
reform movement that arose at this time was heavily influenced by two somewhat contradictory
philosophies. The first was based in Enlightenment ideas of utilitarianism and rationalism, and
suggested that prisons should simply be used as a more effective substitute for public corporal
punishments such as whipping, hanging, etc. This theory, referred to as deterrence, claims that
the primary purpose of prisons is to be so harsh and terrifying that they deter people from
committing crimes out of fear of going to prison. The second theory, which saw prisons as a
form of rehabilitation or moral reform, was based on religious ideas that equated crime with sin,
and saw prisons as a place to instruct prisoners in Christian morality, obedience and proper
behavior. These later reformers believed that prisons could be constructed as humane institutions
of moral instruction, and that prisoners' behavior could be corrected so that when they were
released, they would be model members of society.

                                                             213
Transportation, prison ships and penal colonies
Women in Plymouth, England, Black-eyed Sue and Sweet Poll mourning their lovers who are soon to be
transported to Botany Bay 1792. England used penal transportation of convicted criminals and others
generally young and poor) for a term of indentured servitude within the general population of British
America between the 1610s and 1776. The Transportation Act 1717 made this option available for lesser
crimes, or offered it by discretion as a longer-term alternative to the death penalty, which could
theoretically be imposed for the growing number of offenses. The substantial expansion of transportation
was the first major innovation in eighteenth-century British penal practice.[15] Transportation to America
was abruptly suspended by the Criminal Law Act 1776 (16 Geo. 3 c.43 with the start of the American
Rebellion. While sentencing to transportation continued, the act instituted a punishment policy of hard
labour instead. The suspension of transport also prompted the use of prisons for punishment and the initial
start of a prison building program.[18] Britain would resume transportation to specifically planned penal
colonies in Australia between 1788 and 1868.

Prison reform movement

Jeremy Bentham's panopticon" prison introduced many of the principles of surveillance and
social control that underpin the design of the modern prison. In the panopticon model, prisoners
were housed in one-person cells arranged in a circular pattern, all facing towards a central
observation tower in such a way that the guards could see into all of the cells from the
observation tower, while the prisoners were unable to see the guards.[23][24][f] (Architectural
drawing by Willey Reveley, 1791

John Howard was one of the most notable early prison reformers.[g] After having visited several
hundred prisons across England and Europe, in his capacity as high sheriff of Bedfordshire, he
published The State of the Prisons in 1777. He was particularly appalled to discover prisoners
who had been acquitted but were still confined because they couldn't pay the gaoler's fees. He
proposed wide-ranging reforms to the system, including the housing of each prisoner in a
separate cell; the requirements that staff should be professional and paid by the government, that
outside inspection of prisons should be imposed, and that prisoners should be provided with a
healthy diet and reasonable living conditions. The prison reform charity, the Howard League for
Penal Reform, was established in 1866 by his admirers.

Following Howard's agitation, the Penitentiary Act was passed in 1779. This introduced solitary
confinement, religious instruction, a labor regime, and proposed two state penitentiaries one for
men and one for women. However, these were never built due to disagreements in the committee
and pressures from wars with France, and gaols remained a local responsibility. But other
measures passed in the next few years provided magistrates with the powers to implement many
of these reforms, and eventually, in 1815, gaol fees were abolished.

Quakers were prominent in campaigning against and publicizing the dire state of the prisons at
the time. Elizabeth Fry documented the conditions that prevailed at Newgate prison, where the
ladies' section was overcrowded with women and children, some of whom had not even received
a trial. The inmates did their own cooking and washing in the small cells in which they slept on

                                                             214
straw. In 1816, Fry was able to found a prison school for the children who were imprisoned with
their parents. She also began a system of supervision and required the women to sew and to read
the Bible. In 1817, she helped found the Association.

Development of the modern prison

The theory of the modern prison system was born in London, influenced by the utilitarianism of
Jeremy Bentham. Bentham's panopticon introduced the principle of observation and control that
underpins the design of the modern prison. The notion of prisoners being incarcerated as part of
their punishment and not simply as a holding state until trial or hanging, was at the time
revolutionary. His views influenced the establishment of the first prisons used as criminal
rehabilitation centers. At a time when the implementation of capital punishment for a variety of
relatively trivial offences was on the decline, the notion of incarceration as a form of punishment
and correction held great appeal to reform-minded thinkers and politicians.

In the first half of the 19th century, capital punishment came to be regarded as inappropriate for
many crimes that it had previously been carried out for, and by the mid-19th century,
imprisonment had replaced the death penalty for the most serious offenses except for murder.

The first state prison in England was the Millbank Prison, established in 1816 with a capacity for
just under 1000 inmates. By 1824, 54 prisons had adopted the disciplinary system advocated by
the SIPD. By the 1840s, penal transportation to Australia and the use of hulks was on the decline,
and the Surveyor-General of convict prisons, Joshua Jebb, set an ambitious program of prison
building in the country, with one large prison opening per year. Pentonville prison opened in
1842, beginning a trend of ever increasing incarceration rates and the use of prison as the
primary form of crime punishment.[28] Robert Peel's Gaols Act of 1823 introduced regular visits
to prisoners by chaplains, provided for the payment of gaolers and prohibited the use of irons and
manacles.

An 1855 engraving of New York's Sing Sing Penitentiary, which also followed the "Auburn (or
Congregate) System." where prison cells were placed inside of rectangular buildings that lent
themselves more to large-scale penal labor.

In 1786, the state of Pennsylvania passed a law which mandated that all convicts who had not
been sentenced to death would be placed in penal servitude to do public works projects such as
building roads, forts, and mines. Besides the economic benefits of providing a free source of hard
labor, the proponents of the new penal code also thought that this would deter criminal activity
by making a conspicuous public example of consequences of breaking the law. However, what
actually ended up happening was frequent spectacles of disorderly conduct by the convict work
crews, and the generation of sympathetic feelings from the citizens who witnessed the
mistreatment of the convicts. The laws quickly drew criticism from a humanitarian perspective
as cruel, exploitative and degrading and from a utilitarian perspective as failing to deter crime
and delegitimizing the state in the eyes of the public. Reformers such as Benjamin Rush came up
with a solution that would enable the continued used of forced labor, while keeping disorderly
conduct and abuse out of the eyes of the public. They suggested that prisoners be sent to
secluded houses of repentance where they would be subjected out of the view of the public to

                                                             215
bodily pain, labour, watchfulness, solitude, and silence ... joined with cleanliness and a simple
diet

Pennsylvania soon put this theory into practice, and turned its old jail at Walnut Street in
Philadelphia into a state prison, in 1790. This prison was modeled on what became known as the
Pennsylvania system or separate system, and placed all prisoners into solitary cells with nothing
other than religious literature, and forced them to be completely silent to reflect on their wrongs.
New York soon built the Newgate state prison in Greenwich Village, which was modeled on the
Pennsylvania system,[31] and other states followed.

But by 1820 faith in the efficacy of legal reform had declined as statutory changes had no
discernible effect on the level of crime and the prisons, where prisoners shared large rooms and
booty including alcohol, had become riotous and prone to escapes. In response, New York
developed the Auburn system in which prisoners were confined in separate cells and prohibited
from talking when eating and working together, implementing it at Auburn State Prison and Sing
Sing at Ossining. The aim of this was rehabilitative: the reformers talked about the penitentiary
serving as a model for the family and the school and almost all the states adopted the plan
(though Pennsylvania went even further in separating prisoners. The system's fame spread and
visitors to the U.S. to see the prisons included de Tocqueville who wrote Democracy in America
as a result of his visit.

The use of prisons in Continental Europe was never as popular as it became in the English-
speaking world, although state prison systems were largely in place by the end of the 19th
century in most European countries. After the unification of Italy in 1861, the government
reformed the repressive and arbitrary prison system they inherited, and modernized and
secularized criminal punishment by emphasizing discipline and deterrence.] Italy developed an
advanced penology under the leadership of Cesare Lombroso (1835­1909).

Another prominent prison reformer who made important contributions was Alexander Paterson
who advocated for the necessity of humanising and socialising methods within the prison system
in Great Britain and America.

Design

Shita (Shata) Prison in Israel. Many modern prisons are surrounded by a perimeter of high walls,
razor wire or barbed wire, motion sensors and guard towers in order to prevent prisoners from
escaping.

Security

Prisons are normally surrounded by fencing, walls, earthworks, geographical features, or other
barriers to prevent escape. Multiple barriers, concertina wire, electrified fencing, secured and
defensible main gates, armed guard towers, security lighting, motion sensors, dogs and roving
patrols may all also be present depending on the level of security. Remotely controlled doors,

                                                             216
CCTV monitoring, alarms, cages, restraints, nonlethal and lethal weapons, riot-control gear and
physical segregation of units and prisoners may all also be present within a prison to monitor and
control the movement and activity of prisoners within the facility.

Modern prison designs have increasingly sought to restrict and control the movement of
prisoners throughout the facility and also to allow a smaller prison staff to monitor prisoners
directly; often using a decentralized "podular" layout.[39][40] (In comparison, 19th-century prisons
had large landings and cell blocks which permitted only intermittent observation of prisoners.)
Smaller, separate and self-contained housing units known as "pods" or "modules" are designed to
hold 16 to 50 prisoners and are arranged around exercise yards or support facilities in a
decentralized campus pattern. A small number of prison officers, sometimes a single officer,
supervise each pod. The pods contain tiers of cells arranged around a central control station or
desk from which a single officer can monitor all the cells and the entire pod, control cell doors
and communicate with the rest of the prison.

Pods may be designed for high-security indirect supervision, in which officers in segregated and
sealed control booths monitor smaller numbers of prisoners confined to their cells. An alternative
is "direct supervision, in which officers work within the pod and directly interact with and
supervise prisoners, who may spend the day outside their cells in a central dayroom on the floor
of the pod. Movement in or out of the pod to and from exercise yards, work assignments or
medical appointments can be restricted to individual pods at designated times and is generally
centrally controlled. Goods and services, such as meals, laundry, commissary, educational
materials, religious services and medical care can increasingly be brought to individual pods or
cells as well.

Inmate security classifications

Generally, when an inmate arrives at a prison, they go through a security classification screening
and risk assessment that determines where they will be placed within the prison system.
Classifications are assigned by assessing the prisoner's personal history and criminal record, and
through subjective determinations made by intake personnel which include mental health
workers, counselors, prison unit managers, and others. This process will have a major impact on
the prisoner's experience, determining their security level, educational and work programs,
mental health status (e.g. will they be placed in a mental health unit), and many other factors.
This sorting of prisoners is one of the fundamental techniques through which the prison
administration maintains control over the inmate population, and creates an orderly and secure
prison environment. At most prisons, prisoners are made to wear prison uniform.

The levels of security within a prison system are categorized differently around the world, but
tend to follow a distinct pattern. At one end of the spectrum are the most secure facilities
maximum security, which typically hold prisoners that are considered dangerous, disruptive or
likely to try to escape. Furthermore, in recent times, supermax prisons have been created where
the custody level goes beyond maximum security for people such as terrorists or political
prisoners deemed a threat to national security, and inmates from other prisons who have a history
of violent or other disruptive behavior in prison or are suspected of gang affiliation. These
inmates have individual cells and are kept in lockdown, often for more than 23 hours per day.

                                                             217
Meals are served through "chuck holes" in the cell door, and each inmate is allotted one hour of
outdoor exercise per day, alone. They are normally permitted no contact with other inmates and
are under constant surveillance via closed-circuit television cameras.

A minimum security prison in the US.

On the other end are minimum security prisons which are most often used to house those for
whom more stringent security is deemed unnecessary. For example, while white-collar crime
rarely results in incarceration, when it does offenders are almost always sent to minimum-
security prisons due to them having committed nonviolent crimes. Lower-security prisons are
often designed with less restrictive features, confining prisoners at night in smaller locked
dormitories or even cottage or cabin-like housing while permitting them free movement around
the grounds to work or activities during the day. Some countries (such as Britain) also have
"open" prisons where prisoners are allowed home-leave or part-time employment outside of the
prison. Suomenlinna Island facility in Finland is an example of one such open correctional
facility. The prison has been open since 1971 and, as of September 2013, the facility's 95 male
prisoners leave the prison grounds on a daily basis to work in the corresponding township or
commute to the mainland for either work or study. Prisoners can rent flat-screen televisions,
sound systems, and mini-refrigerators with the prison-labor wages that they can earn--wages
range between 4.10 and 7.30 per hour. With electronic monitoring, prisoners are also allowed to
visit their families in Helsinki and eat together with the prison staff. Prisoners in Scandinavian
facilities are permitted to wear their own clothes.

Common facilities

The crowded living quarters of San Quentin Prison in California, in January 2006. As a result of
overcrowding in the California state prison system, the United States Supreme Court ordered
California to reduce its prison population (the second largest in the nation, after Texas.

Modern prisons often hold hundreds or thousands of inmates, and must have facilities onsite to
meet most of their needs, including dietary, health, fitness, education, religious practices,
entertainment, and many others. Conditions in prisons vary widely around the world, and the
types of facilities within prisons depend on many intersecting factors including funding, legal
requirements, and cultural beliefs/practices. Nevertheless, in addition to the cell blocks that
contain the prisoners, also there are certain auxiliary facilities that are common in prisons
throughout the world.

Kitchen and dining

Prisons generally have to provide food for a large number of individuals, and thus are generally
equipped with a large institutional kitchen. There are many security considerations, however,
that are unique to the prison dining environment. For instance, cutlery equipment must be very
carefully monitored and accounted for at all times, and the layout of prison kitchens must be
designed in a way that allows staff to observe activity of the kitchen staff who are usually
prisoners. The quality of kitchen equipment varies from prison to prison, depending on when the

                                                             218
prison was constructed, and the level of funding available to procure new equipment. Prisoners
are often served food in a large cafeteria with rows of tables and benches that are securely
attached to the floor. However, inmates that are locked in control units, or prisons that are on
lockdown where prisoners are made to remain in their cells all day have trays of food brought to
their cells. It is said that prison food of many developed countries is adequate to maintain health
and dieting.

Healthcare

Prisons in wealthy, industrialized nations provide medical care for most of their inmates.
Additionally, prison medical staff play a major role in monitoring, organizing, and controlling
the prison population through the use of psychiatric evaluations and interventions (psychiatric
drugs, isolation in mental health units, etc.). Prison populations are largely from poor minority
communities that experience greater rates of chronic illness, substance abuse, and mental illness
than the general population. This leads to a high demand for medical services, and in countries
such as the US that don't provide free healthcare, prison is often the first place that people are
able to receive medical treatment (which they couldn't afford outside.

Prison medical facilities include primary care, mental health services, dental care, substance
abuse treatment, and other forms of specialized care, depending on the needs of the inmate
population. Health care services in many prisons have long been criticized as inadequate,
underfunded, and understaffed, and many prisoners have experienced abuse and mistreatment at
the hands of prison medical staff who are entrusted with their care.

In the United States, mental health services in prison aren't available in providing treatments for
criminals; most prisoners have an untreated mental disorder and psychiatric care or treatment is
expensive for the mentally ill. 64 percent of jail inmates, 54 percent of state prisoners, and 45
percent of federal prisoners in the US report having mental health concerns.

Despite the fact that studies reveal more than 50% of those incarcerated are likely to suffer from
at least one mental illness or condition, the verdict of "not guilty by reason of insanity" is
exceedingly rare according to a 2014 Scientific American article. In the United States, a million
people who are incarcerated suffer from mental illness without any assistance or treatment for
their condition and the tendency of a convicted criminal to reoffend, known as the rate of
recidivism, is unusually high for those with the most serious disorders. Analysis of data in 2000
from several forensic hospitals in California, New York and Oregon found that with treatment
the rate of recidivism was "much lower" than untreated mentally ill offenders. Treatment works
to lower crime among those who are mentally ill, but public support is often shaded by stigmas.
Without public support, funding is restricted and the cycle of recidivism that feeds the U.S.
prison system is perpetuated. The issue of health care for prisoners with mental illness is not a
moral issue, it is a psychological issue, and if treatment were readily available, crime would
decrease as would the rate of recidivism among those who are mentally ill who are essentially
trapped in a prison system that offers little to no relief.

                                                             219
Library and educational facilities

Some prisons provide educational programs for inmates that can include basic literacy,
secondary education, or even college education. Prisoners seek education for a variety of
reasons, including the development of skills for after release, personal enrichment and curiosity,
finding something to fill their time, or trying to please prison staff (which can often secure early
release for good behavior). However, the educational needs of prisoners often come into conflict
with the security concerns of prison staff and with a public that wants to be "tough on crime"
(and thus supports denying prisoners access to education). Whatever their reasons for
participating in educational programs, prison populations tend to have very low literacy rates and
lack of basic mathematical skills, and many have not completed secondary education. This lack
of basic education severely limits their employment opportunities outside of prison, leading to
high rates of recidivism, and research has shown that prison education can play a significant role
in helping prisoners reorient their lives and become successful after reentry.

Many prisons also provide a library where prisoners can check out books, or do legal research
for their cases.[j] Often these libraries are very small, consisting of a few shelves of books. In
some countries, such as the United States, drastic budget cuts have resulted in many prison
libraries being shut down. Meanwhile, many nations that have historically lacked prison libraries
are starting to develop them.[58] Prison libraries can dramatically improve the quality of life for
prisoners, who have large amounts of empty time on their hands that can be occupied with
reading. This time spent reading has a variety of benefits including improved literacy, ability to
understand rules and regulations (leading to improved behavior), ability to read books that
encourage self-reflection and analysis of one's emotional state, consciousness of important real-
world events, and education that can lead to successful re-entry into society after release.[59][60]

Recreation and fitness

Many prisons provide limited recreational and fitness facilities for prisoners. The provision of
these services is controversial, with certain elements of society claiming that prisons are being
"soft" on inmates, and others claiming that it is cruel and dehumanizing to confine people for
years without any recreational opportunities. The tension between these two opinions, coupled
with lack of funding, leads to a large variety of different recreational procedures at different
prisons. Prison administrators, however, generally find the provision of recreational
opportunities to be useful at maintaining order in the prisons, because it keeps prisoners occupied
and provides leverage to gain compliance (by depriving prisoners of recreation as punishment).
Examples of common facilities/programs that are available in some prisons are: gyms and
weightlifting rooms, arts and crafts, games (such as cards, chess, or bingo), television sets, and
sports teams.] Additionally, many prisons have an outdoor recreation area, commonly referred to
as an "exercise

NIGERIA PRISONS

At the apex of the NPS sits the Controller-General of the Nigerian Prisons Service. He is the
Chief Executive Officer and is responsible for the formulations and implementation of penal
policies in Nigeria. He is responsible to the President through the Minister of Interior and the

                                                             220
Civil Defence, Fire, Immigration and Prisons Services Board which the Minister heads. But in
matters of prison policy he takes direct responsibility for policy implementation.
He is assisted by six (6) Deputy Controllers-General (DCGs) who head the six broad
administrative divisions called Directorates into which the Service is broken for efficient
management.

The origin of modern Prisons Service in Nigeria is 1861. That was the year when conceptually,

Western-type prison was established in Nigeria. The declaration of Lagos as a colony in 1861

marked the beginning of the institution of formal machinery of governance. At this stage the

preoccupation of the colonial government was to protect legitimate trade, guarantee the profit of

British merchants as well as guarantee the activities of the missionaries. To this end, by 1861, the

acting governor of the Lagos colony and who was then a prominent British merchant in Lagos,

formed a Police Force of about 25 constables. This was followed in 1863 by the establishment in

Lagos of four courts: a Police court to resolve petty disputes, a criminal court to try the more

serious cases, a slave court to try cases arising from the efforts to abolish the trade in slaves and a

commercial court to resolve disputes among merchants and traders. The functioning of these

courts and the police in that colonial setting necessarily means that prison was needed to

complete the system. And it was not long in coming for in 1872, the Broad Street prison was

established with an initial inmate capacity of 300. In the Niger Delta, the relationship between

the local people and the British merchants had before then been moderated by special courts of

merchants backed by the British Navy especially with the appointment of John Beecroft as a

consul in 1849. The need for a merchant court was underscored by the fact that most conflicts

between the merchants and the local people were in the main commercial. Although there was

evidence of prison in Bonny at this time, not much is known about its size and content. But those

who were later to oppose British rule were usually deported as happened in the case of Jaja of

Opobo  and  King       Dappa  of  Bonny.

However, the progressive incursion of the British into the hinterland and the establishment of

British protectorate towards the end of the 19th century necessitated the establishment of the

prisons as the last link in the Criminal Justice System. Thus by 1910, there already were prisons

in Degema, Calabar, Onitsha, Benin, Ibadan, Sapele, Jebba and Lokoja. The declaration of

protectorates over the East, West and North by 1906 effectively brought the entire Nigeria area

under British rule. However, that did not mark the beginning of a unified Nigerian Prisons. Had

that been so, it would have negated official colonial policy for that would have required funds

which the colonial power was not prepared to expend.

Even so, the colonial prison at this stage was not designed to reform anyone. There was no

systematic penal policy from which direction could be sought for penal administration. Instead

prisoners were in the main used for public works and other jobs for the colonial administration.

For this reason there was no need for the recruitment of trained officers of the prisons. Hence

colonial prisons had no trained and developed staff of their own and instead the police also

performed prison duties. As time went on ex-servicemen were recruited to do the job.

They were also very poorly run and the local prison conditions varied from one place to another

in their disorganization, callousness and exploitation. But so long as they served the colonial

interests of ensuring law and order, collecting taxes, and providing labour for public works, they

were generally left alone. The result was that the prisons served the purpose of punishing those

who had the guts to oppose colonial administration in one form or the other while at the same

time cowing those who might want to stir up trouble for the colonial set up.

                  221
The Prison regulation was published in 1917 to prescribe admission, custody, treatment and
classification procedures as well as staffing, dieting and clothing regimes for the prisons. These
processes were limited in one very general sense. They were not geared towards any particular
type of treatment of inmates. Instead they represent just policies of containment of those who
were already in prison. Besides, they were limited in application to those who were convicted or
remanded in custody by criminal courts of the British-inspired supreme or provincial types.
Those remanded or convicted by the Native courts were sent to the Native Authority prisons. The
prison regulation also distinguished between Awaiting Trial and convicted inmates and even
stipulated the convict ­ category to be found in each type of prison. But the limited application of
this general rule to the national Prison while the native Authority Prison went their own way
effectively stultified the appearance of a national Prison goal-orientation in terms of inmate
treatment
It was not until 1934 that any meaningful attempt was made to introduce relative modernization
into the Prison Service. It was at this time that Colonel V. L. Mabb was appointed Director of
Prisons by the then Governor Sir Donald Cameron. Although a military officer, Mabb had an
understanding of what prisons should be. And he went on to do his best. What he seemed to have
focused his attention on was the formation of a unified Prison structure for the whole country but
he failed. Yet he succeeded in extending the substantive Director of Prisons` supervisory and
inspectoral powers over the Native Authority Prisons by this time dominant in the North. It was
also during his tenure that the Prisons Warders welfare Board was formed.
His efforts were to be continued by his successor R. H. Dolan (1946 ­ 55). Mr. Dolan was a
trained prison officer and when he assumed duties in Nigeria he already had a wealth of
experience in prison administration in both Britain and the colonies. Although a scheme for the
introduction of vocational training in the National Prisons had been introduced in 1917 and it
failed except in Kaduna and Lokoja prisons where it was functioning in 1926, Mr. Dolan
reintroduced it in 1949 as a cardinal part of a penal treatment in Nigeria. He also made
classification of prisoners mandatory in all prisons and went on to introduce visits by relations to
inmates. He also introduced progressive earning schemes for long term first offenders. He also
transferred the Prisons Headquarters formerly in Enugu to Lagos to facilitate close cooperation
with other Department of State. He also introduced moral and adult education classes to be
handled by competent Ministers and teachers for both Christian and Islamic education.
Programmes for recreation and relaxation of prisoners were introduced during his tenure as well
as the formation of an association for the care and rehabilitation of discharged prisoners. But
above all, he initiated a programme for the construction and expansion of even bigger convict
prisons to enhance the proper classification and accommodation of prisoners.
On manpower development, he was instrumental to the founding of the Prison Training School,
Enugu in 1947. He also saw to the appointment of educated wardresses to take charge of the
female wings of the prisons and he generally tried to improve the service conditions of the prison
staff. In addition, he took classification a step further when in 1948 he opened four reformatories
in Lagos and converted part of the Port-Harcourt prisons for the housing and treatment of
juveniles. Five years later he was to build an open prison in Kakuri - Kaduna to take care of first
offenders who had committed such crimes as murder and manslaughter, and who are serving
terms of 15 years or more. The idea was to train them with minimum supervision in agriculture
so that on discharge they could employ themselves gainfully. In fact, Dolan`s tenure represented
a very high point in the evolution of Nigeria Prisons Service.

                                                             222
NIGERIA PRISONS TODAY:

The abolition of Native Authority prisons in 1968 and the subsequent unification of the Prisons

Service in Nigeria therefore marked the beginning of Nigerian Prisons Service as a composite

reality. Prior to this, the prisons in the North were under the general supervision of the Northern

Inspector General of Police who was ex-officio Director of Prisons. In the same vain the Director

of Prisons was in charge of the prisons in the south. The Gobir report put an end to all that. As a

consequence of that report Native Authority prisons were abolished with effect from 1st April,

1968. However, due to the vagaries of the civil war then raging in the country, it was not until

1971 that the government white paper on the reorganization of the prisons was released. It was

followed in 1972 by Decree No.9 of 1972 which spelt out the goals and orientation of the

Nigerian Prisons Service. The Prisons was charged with taking custody of those legally detained,

identifying causes of their behaviour and retraining them to become useful citizens in the society.

From the foregoing it seems clear that though the Decree makes secure custody the first role of

the prisons, it also makes it explicit that reform and rehabilitation are the ultimate aims of the

Prisons Service. And to achieve this objective the administration of the prisons became

streamlined. The service which had hitherto been generally administered under one Director,

now had in addition to the Director three principal agencies or divisions performing different

roles to enable (the prisons) execute its programme expeditiously and achieve its goal. These

divisions are Technical, Inspectorate and Welfare with each unit under a Deputy Director of

Prisons. The idea was that in consonance with the stipulations of Decree 9 of 1972, there was the

need to introduce specialized units to take care of specific areas of the Prisons Service. The

Technical Division for instance was charged with the responsibility of general administration and

the provision of logistics to addition to supervising the farms and industries. The Inspectorate

Division was to oversee staff deployment, training, discipline, promotion and recruitment. The

welfare division was to be the pivot of the new prison order. It was to see to inmate treatment,

training and rehabilitation. It also oversees the medical needs of the prisons in addition to liaising

between the prisons and voluntary and humanitarian organizations who assist in the treatment

and            rehabilitation           of           the           prisoners.

Following from this was the need to employ skilled manpower especially in the social welfare

unit. To this end between 1974 and 1980 a group of officers, mostly pivotal teachers was

recruited as social welfare officers to take on adjustment-related programmes and rehabilitation

of prisoners. In addition professional Nurses and Doctors were recruited to beef up the medical

staff strength as well as expertise. Besides between 1972 and 1974 over three hundred graduates

were recruited into the Service as general duty officers to see to the day to day running of the

Prisons. It was hoped that their enlightenment will help direct other staff towards the goals of the

prisons which are in the main treatment of offenders.

There have been massive transformations in the Service since 1972. It has undergone some

reorganization from its modest three Directorates in 1980 to six Directorates in 1993. There was

the 1986 reorganization of the Prisons consequent upon the creation of the Customs,

Immigrations and Prisons Board and centralization of the administrations of these paramilitary

Services in the Board. There was also the removal of the Services from the Civil Service in 1992.

It now has a command structure that boast of 8 Zonal commands, 36 State Commands, 1 FCT

Command, 144 Prisons including farm centres and 83 Satellite Prisons. It also has four Training

Schools,  one  Staff           College       and  2       Borstal  Institutions.

At the level of manpower the Service now boasts of more men of the professions than at any

                                        223
other time in its history. There are among the officers, medical, environmental health officers,

sociologists/psychologists, lawyers, general administrators, engineers etc. As for professional

spread, the full complement of these officers is on ground to ensure that the goal of inmate

reform                                  is                                        attained.

In the last ten years no less than 12 new satellite prisons and 3 prison hospitals have been built.

The purpose being to modernize and create the enabling environment for proper treatment and

training of offenders. There is also no doubt that the Special Prison Reform Programme of the

Federal Government in 1999 made a lot of difference to the structure of Prisons.

Theories of punishment and criminality

A variety of justifications and explanations are put forth for why people are imprisoned by the
state. The most common of these are:[107]

     Rehabilitation:[m] Theories of rehabilitation claim that the experience of being
         imprisoned will cause people to change their lives in a way that will make them
         productive and law-abiding members of society once they are released. However, this is
         not supported by empirical evidence, and in practice prisons tend to be ineffective at
         improving the lives of most prisoners.[108] As Morris and Rothman (1995) point out, "It's
         hard to train for freedom in a cage. While the view of prisons as centers of rehabilitation
         was popular during the early development of the modern prison system, it is not widely
         held anymore, and has mostly been replaced by theories of deterrence, incapacitation,
         and retribution.[109]

     Deterrence: Theories of deterrence claim that by sentencing criminals to extremely harsh
         penalties, other people who might be considering criminal activities will be so terrified of
         the consequences that they will choose not to commit crimes out of fear. In reality, most
         studies show that high incarceration rates either increase crime, have no noticeable effect,
         or only decrease it by a very small amount. Prisons act as training grounds for criminal
         activity, form criminal social networks, expose prisoners to further abuse (both from staff
         and other prisoners), foster anti-social sentiments towards society (law enforcement and
         corrections personnel in particular), fragment communities, and leave prisoners with
         criminal records that make it difficult to find legal employment after release. All of these
         things can result in a higher likelihood of reoffending upon release.

     Incapacitation: Justifications based on incapacitation claim that while prisoners are
         incarcerated, they will be unable to commit crimes, thus keeping communities safer.
         Critics point out that this is based on a false distinction between "inside" and "outside",
         and that the prisoners will simply continue to victimize people inside of the prison (and in
         the community once they are released), and that the harm done by these actions has real
         impacts on the society outside of the prison walls.

     Retribution: Theories of retribution seek to exact revenge upon criminals by harming
         them in exchange for harms caused to their victims. These theories do not necessarily
         focus on whether or not a particular punishment benefits the community, but are more
         concerned with ensuring that the punishment causes a sufficient level of misery for the
         prisoner, in proportion to the perceived seriousness of their crime. These theories are
         based upon a belief that some kind of moral balance will be achieved by "paying back"
         the prisoner for the wrongs they have committed.

                                        224
Challenges of nigerian prisons

Overpopulation

This is a major factor that makes life very unbearable for prison inmates. At the Owerri Federal
Prisons, there are approximately 2,000 inmates, plus or minus 100. Out of this number, only
about 10 per cent are convicts serving their various jail terms. The remaining ones are awaiting
trial` inmates. The cells at the prisons are usually over crowded. For example, my cell (1 ward 2
cell) measuring 32 feet in length and 28 feet in width has approximately 100 inmates staying
there. Ordinarily, not more than 40 inmates are supposed to be there. The 100 people use only
one bathroom and two toilets. This makes it easy for one to contact diseases, especially skin
rashes, Apollo (conjunctivitis), chicken pox, small pox, measles, etc. I was lucky, I did not
contact any. (It is not a laughing matter.

Poor quality of food

The quality of food being served the inmates is nothing to write home about. Their soup is called
chakpadim. This is because it is too watery. The beans is averagely okay. The rice and gari is
something else. The sizes of meat and fish served the inmates are as small as Tom-Tom sweet.
Due to the poor quality of food served the inmates in general, they look malnourished. I never
ate prisons` food; neither did I drink their water. My wife and I were on self-feeding throughout
our stay.

Lack of adequate health care

The health facilities in Prisons are not adequate. It can only take care of minor health challenges
like headache, typhoid fever, measles, small pox, chicken pox, etc. Also Retroviral drugs for
HIV positive inmates are available. Health facilities at the prisons cannot take care of inmates
with sight (eyes) problems, tooth aches, kidney problems, liver problems, mentally deranged
fellows, pregnant female inmates, and serious cases that require surgery etc. Hence occasionally,
deaths occur among the inmates, due to lack of adequate health facilities.

Poverty and inability to hire lawyers

This is a major factor frustrating many inmates and has deprived many of them from securing
their freedom. As a result many of them waste up to 10 years in prison awaiting trials without
going to court.

Over 90 per cent inmates are awaiting trial

This is a major factor because our criminal justice system is not effective. It is very fraudulent.

Absence of household items

The Nigerian Prisons Service do not provide essential items such as soaps, tooth brush, tooth
paste, chewing sticks, tissue papers, sanitary pads, body creams, detergents, inner wears (pants

                                                             225
and singlet), slippers etc, for the inmates. They only provide food, as I mentioned earlier. This
simply means that inmates are left to fend for themselves on these essential items. While the rich
ones manage to provide these items, the poor ones simply end up as shadow of themselves.

Absence of judges in courts

This is a notorious fact. In Imo State, there are about 15 high courts in Owerri Judicial Division,
but only three or four high courts are functional with judges. The remaining courts are empty and
under lock and key. Yet, thousands of cases were criminally assigned to them, just to ensure that
people (inmates) remain permanently in prison. I want to be proved wrong. If I am challenged on
this, I will give details.

Conspiracy

There must be a conspiracy between State Counsel and complainants, to ensure that cases are
given long adjournments. This factor is self-explanatory, and it is the truth. At least, it is
happening in Imo State.

There is equally a conspiracy between judges and complainants to ensure that cases are given
long adjournments. This is a notorious fact. In Imo State, it is happening. Such judges are called
political and business judges. They are shameless. In extreme cases, the dishonourable judges
adjourn cases sine-die to justify the money they collected from complainants (mostly
government house officials), thereby keeping innocent people (inmates) permanently in prison. If
I am challenged, I will give details.

Missing case files

This is equally a notorious fact. Many innocent inmates at the Owerri Federal Prisons do not
know the whereabouts of their case files. Police officers of the Imo State Police Command who
are were the Investigating Police Officers are reportedly guilty of this debilitating wickedness. I
want to be proved wrong.

Mental illness among inmates

It is a notorious fact that there are inmates who are not organised, disciplined and God-fearing,
who engage in Indian hemp smoking.

Children born by female inmates undergo psychological torture

This is an acknowledged fact. Most of these female inmates were impregnated by their
Investigating Police Officers who promised to assist them out of the case when they were
detained at their respective police stations. Unfortunately, they merely used them to satisfy their
sexual desires. Some female inmates are married and might have been pregnant before being
remanded at the prisons. Yet, others might have been impregnated inside prison premises under
special arrangement to satisfy sexual desires of female inmates. Also, some female inmates
might have had their babies shortly before being arrested by the police, taken to court and

                                                             226
thereafter remanded in prisons for alleged crimes earlier committed. The resultant effect is that
children born by the female inmates suffer from lack of love, home-training, psychological
torture, and unaware of the existence of life outside the walls of prisons. Ninety per cent of
children born inside prisons grow up to fight the society.

Sexual abuses among inmates

This is a notorious fact. Homosexuality and lesbianism among inmates are rampant. Having
stayed in prison for so long and without the opportunity to have sex with the opposite sex, some
inmates resort to the evil practice of homosexuality and lesbianism. However, prisons authorities
at the Owerri Federal Prisons have placed adequate measures to check this abnormal method of
sexual satisfaction. Any inmate or inmates caught in this satanic act is (are) given punishment.
For example, when two people are caught in homosexual act, they are usually flogged, stripped
naked and charcoal dust poured on them. After that, they would be made to undergo black
wedding and driven in a wheel-barrow around the prison yard. After that, they would be made to
under-go another round of punishment, which I will not like to disclose in this piece. For me, I
support even stiffer and harder punishment for any inmate caught in homosexual act.

Drug abuse

This is a notorious fact, and it is self-explanatory.

THE RIGHTS OF PRISONERS

all prisoners have the basic rights needed to survive and sustain a reasonable way of life. most
rights are taken away ostensibly so the prison system can maintain order, discipline, and security.
any of the following rights, given to prisoners, can be taken away for that purpose:

the right to:

     not be punished cruelly or unusually
     due processes
     administrative appeals
     access the parole process (denied to those incarcerated in the federal system)
     practice religion freely
     equal protection (fourteenth amendment)
     be notified of all charges against them
     receive a written statement explaining evidence used in reaching a disposition
     file a civil suit against another person
     medical treatment (both long and short term)
     treatment that is both adequate and appropriate
     a hearing upon being relocated to the mental health facility.
     personal property such as: cigarettes, stationary, a watch, cosmetics, and snack-food
     visitation
     privacy
     food that would sustain an average person adequately.

                                                             227
     bathe (for sanitation and health reasons).

many rights are taken away from prisoners often temporarily.[citation needed] for example, prison
personnel are required to read and inspect all in-going or out-going mail, in order to prevent
prisoners from obtaining contraband. the only time a prisoner has a full right to privacy is in
conversations with their attorney.

The Structure of the Nigerian prison

At the apex of the NPS sits the Controller-General of the Nigerian Prisons Service. He is the

Chief Executive Officer and is responsible for the formulations and implementation of penal

policies in Nigeria. He is responsible to the President through the Minister of Interior and the

Civil Defence, Fire, Immigration and Prisons Services Board which the Minister heads. But in

matters of prison policy he takes direct responsibility for policy implementation.

He is assisted by six (6) Deputy Controllers-General who head the six broad administrative

divisions called Directorates into which the Service is broken for efficient management.

The Deputy Controllers-General who head the Directorates report to the Controller-General and

constitute together with the Controller-General the highest decision-making body in the

Administration  of  the                             Nigerian  Prisons  Service.

The Directorates are specialized divisions charged with the responsibility of coordinating

specific areas of prison administration. They are:

1. Operations
2. Administration and Supplies
3. Health and Social Welfare
4. Finance and Budget
5. Inmates` Training and Productivity
6. Works and Logistics

The origin of modern Prisons Service in Nigeria is 1861. That was the year when conceptually, Western-
type prison was established in Nigeria. The declaration of Lagos as a colony in 1861 marked the
beginning of the institution of formal machinery of governance. At this stage the preoccupation of the
colonial government was to protect legitimate trade, guarantee the profit of British merchants as well as
guarantee the activities of the missionaries. To this end, by 1861, the acting governor of the Lagos colony
and who was then a prominent British merchant in Lagos, formed a Police Force of about 25 constables.
This was followed in 1863 by the establishment in Lagos of four courts: a Police court to resolve petty
disputes, a criminal court to try the more serious cases, a slave court to try cases arising from the efforts to
abolish the trade in slaves and a commercial court to resolve disputes among merchants and traders. The
functioning of these courts and the police in that colonial setting necessarily means that prison was
needed to complete the system. And it was not long in coming for in 1872, the Broad Street prison was
established with an initial inmate capacity of 300. In the Niger Delta, the relationship between the local
people and the British merchants had before then been moderated by special courts of merchants backed
by the British Navy especially with the appointment of John Beecroft as a consul in 1849. The need for a
merchant court was underscored by the fact that most conflicts between the merchants and the local
people were in the main commercial. Although there was evidence of prison in Bonny at this time, not

                                                             228
much is known about its size and content. But those who were later to oppose British rule were usually

deported as happened in the case of Jaja of Opobo and King Dappa of Bonny.

However, the progressive incursion of the British into the hinterland and the establishment of British

protectorate towards the end of the 19th century necessitated the establishment of the prisons as the last

link in the Criminal Justice System. Thus by 1910, there already were prisons in Degema, Calabar,

Onitsha, Benin, Ibadan, Sapele, Jebba and Lokoja. The declaration of protectorates over the East, West

and North by 1906 effectively brought the entire Nigeria area under British rule. However, that did not

mark the beginning of a unified Nigerian Prisons. Had that been so, it would have negated official

colonial policy for that would have required funds which the colonial power was not prepared to expend.

Even so, the colonial prison at this stage was not designed to reform anyone. There was no systematic

penal policy from which direction could be sought for penal administration. Instead prisoners were in the

main used for public works and other jobs for the colonial administration. For this reason there was no

need for the recruitment of trained officers of the prisons. Hence colonial prisons had no trained and

developed staff of their own and instead the police also performed prison duties. As time went on ex-

servicemen  were  recruited       to        do       the  job.

They were also very poorly run and the local prison conditions varied from one place to another in their

disorganization, callousness and exploitation. But so long as they served the colonial interests of ensuring

law and order, collecting taxes, and providing labour for public works, they were generally left alone. The

result was that the prisons served the purpose of punishing those who had the guts to oppose colonial

administration in one form or the other while at the same time cowing those who might want to stir up

trouble     for   the             colonial      set       up.

The Prison regulation was published in 1917 to prescribe admission, custody, treatment and classification

procedures as well as staffing, dieting and clothing regimes for the prisons. These processes were limited

in one very general sense. They were not geared towards any particular type of treatment of inmates.

Instead they represent just policies of containment of those who were already in prison. Besides, they

were limited in application to those who were convicted or remanded in custody by criminal courts of the

British-inspired supreme or provincial types. Those remanded or convicted by the Native courts were sent

to the Native Authority prisons. The prison regulation also distinguished between Awaiting Trial and

convicted inmates and even stipulated the convict ­ category to be found in each type of prison. But the

limited application of this general rule to the national Prison while the native Authority Prison went their

own way effectively stultified the appearance of a national Prison goal-orientation in terms of inmate

treatment

It was not until 1934 that any meaningful attempt was made to introduce relative modernization into the

Prison Service. It was at this time that Colonel V. L. Mabb was appointed Director of Prisons by the then

Governor Sir Donald Cameron. Although a military officer, Mabb had an understanding of what prisons

should be. And he went on to do his best. What he seemed to have focused his attention on was the

formation of a unified Prison structure for the whole country but he failed. Yet he succeeded in extending

the substantive Director of Prisons` supervisory and inspectoral powers over the Native Authority Prisons

by this time dominant in the North. It was also during his tenure that the Prisons Warders welfare Board

was                                                       formed.

His efforts were to be continued by his successor R. H. Dolan (1946 ­ 55). Mr. Dolan was a trained

prison officer and when he assumed duties in Nigeria he already had a wealth of experience in prison

administration in both Britain and the colonies. Although a scheme for the introduction of vocational

training in the National Prisons had been introduced in 1917 and it failed except in Kaduna and Lokoja

                             229
prisons where it was functioning in 1926, Mr. Dolan reintroduced it in 1949 as a cardinal part of a penal

treatment in Nigeria. He also made classification of prisoners mandatory in all prisons and went on to

introduce visits by relations to inmates. He also introduced progressive earning schemes for long term

first offenders. He also transferred the Prisons Headquarters formerly in Enugu to Lagos to facilitate close

cooperation with other Department of State. He also introduced moral and adult education classes to be

handled by competent Ministers and teachers for both Christian and Islamic education. Programmes for

recreation and relaxation of prisoners were introduced during his tenure as well as the formation of an

association for the care and rehabilitation of discharged prisoners. But above all, he initiated a programme

for the construction and expansion of even bigger convict prisons to enhance the proper classification and

accommodation        of                                                            prisoners.

On manpower development, he was instrumental to the founding of the Prison Training School, Enugu in

1947. He also saw to the appointment of educated wardresses to take charge of the female wings of the

prisons and he generally tried to improve the service conditions of the prison staff. In addition, he took

classification a step further when in 1948 he opened four reformatories in Lagos and converted part of the

Port-Harcourt prisons for the housing and treatment of juveniles. Five years later he was to build an open

prison in Kakuri Kaduna to take care of first offenders who had committed such crimes as murder and

manslaughter, and who are serving terms of 15 years or more. The idea was to train them with minimum

supervision in agriculture so that on discharge they could employ themselves gainfully. In fact, Dolan`s

tenure represented a very high point in the evolution of Nigeria Prisons Service.

4.0 SUMMARY

Prisons have four major purposes. These purposes are retribution, incapacitation, deterrence and
rehabilitation. Retribution means punishment for crimes against society. Depriving criminals of
their freedom is a way of making them pay a debt to society for their crimes. Incapacitation
refers to the removal of criminals from society so that they can no longer harm innocent people.
Deterrence means the prevention of future crime. It is hoped that prisons provide warnings to
people thinking about commiting crimes, and that the possibility of going to prison will
discourage people from breaking the law. Rehabilitation refers to activities designed to change
criminals into law abiding citizens, and may include providing educational courses in prison,
teaching job skills and offering counselling with a psychologist or social worker. The four major
purposes of prisons have not been stressed equally through the years. As a result, prisons differ
in the makeup of their staffs, the design of their buildings and their operations.

5.0 CONCLUSION

As a rule we have very hazy ideas indeed as to the proper function and the requisite efficiency
of the prison as a social institution. So general is the impression that prisons are a necessary part
of our social machinery that for the time being we will accept that impression as true, and
consider only the questions of function and efficiency. In a general way we agree that prisons
should serve a threefold purpose: they should be places of social vengeance where we punish
persons who break the law; they should be safe places to segregate unpleasant and dangerous
persons; and they should be places where some indefinite thing called "reformation" is achieved
by some unknown and mysterious process.

                230
6.0 TUT0R-MARKED ASSIGNMENT:
1. Explain the historical development of the Nigerian prison service and discuss five main
functions of prison in Njgeria.
2. Discuss the at least four theories of punishment of the Nigerian prisons

7.0 REFERENCE /FOR FURTHER READING
George Jackson, Soledad Brother, Bantam Books, New York, 1970, p. 29
See the especially good article by Jessica Mitford, "Kind and Usual Punishment: The California
Prisons," The Atlantic Monthly, March 1971.
James V. McConnell, "Brainwashing the Criminals," Psychology Today, April 1970, Vol. 3, No.
11.
Herbert Marcuse, Essay on Liberation, Beacon Press, Boston, 1970, p. 74.
Time Magazine, "U.S. Prisons: Schools for Crime," January 18, 1971.
Theodore R. Sarbin, "The Myth of the Criminal Type," Monday Evening Papers #18, Center for
Advanced Studies, Wesleyan University, 1969.
Herbert L. Packer, "Crimes of Progress," New York Review of Books, October 23, 1969.
Edward C. Banfield, The Unheavenly City: The Nature and Future of Our Urban Crisis, Little,
Brown, Boston, 1970, pp. 53, 62, 112 122, 163, and 211, respectively. See the review/essay of
this book by Herbert Aptheker, "Banfield: The Nixon Model Planner," Political Affairs,
December 1970. Ibid, pp. 245-246
See Susan Castro, "Line of Defense Against Fascism," People's World, June 1970, p. 10.

                                                             231
