                   CODE
                      OF

    CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
                     FOR

BANKS AND DISCOUNT HOUSES IN
                   NIGERIA

                                                                                                      MAY 2014
TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECTION  DESCRIPTION

1.0      Introduction

2.0      Board and Management

2.1      Responsibilities of the Board

2.2      Size and Composition

2.3      Separation of Powers

2.4      Appointment and Tenure

2.5      Board Committees

2.6      Board Meetings

2.7      Remuneration

2.8      Board Appraisal

3.0      Shareholders

3.1      Rights and Functions of Shareholders

3.2      Equity Ownership

3.3      Protection of Shareholder Rights

3.4      Meetings

3.5      Shareholder Associations

4.0      Rights of other Stakeholders

5.0      Disclosures in the Annual Report

5.2      Transparency and Integrity in Reporting

5.3      Whistle Blowing

6.0      Risk Management

7.0      Ethics & Professionalism and Conflict of Interest

7.1      Ethics & Professionalism

7.2      Conflict of Interest

8.0      Sanctions

9.0      Effective Date

                               2
1.0 INTRODUCTION

        The term corporate governance refers to the rules, processes, or
        laws by which institutions are operated, regulated and governed. It
        is developed with the primary purpose of promoting a transparent
        and efficient banking system that will engender the rule of law and
        encourage division of responsibilities in a professional and objective
        manner.

        Effective corporate governance practices provides a structure that
        works for the benefit of stakeholders by ensuring that the enterprise
        adheres to accepted ethical standards and best practices as well
        as formal laws.

        A country's economy depends on the safety and soundness of its
        financial institutions. Thus the effectiveness with which the Boards of
        financial institutions discharge their responsibilities determines the
        country's competitive position. They must be free to drive their
        institutions forward, but exercise that freedom within a framework of
        transparency and effective accountability. This is the essence of any
        system of good corporate governance.

        Corporate governance has received increased attention because
        of high-profile scandals involving abuse of corporate power and, in
        some cases, alleged criminal activity by corporate officers.
        Following the conclusion of the consolidation programme in 2005, a
        Code of Corporate Governance for Banks in Nigeria was issued to
        the banking industry. The Code which became effective in April
        2006 was designed to enhance corporate governance practices
        within the banking industry in view of the fact that governance
        mechanisms in banks was notably weak and Board members of
        financial institutions were unaware of their statutory and fiduciary
        responsibilities, and merely endorsed all proposals of executive

                                                               3
        management regardless of their implications to the financial
        condition and going concern status of such institutions.

        However, during the implementation of the code, it was observed
        that certain provisions could not be implemented by banks in view
        of their ambiguity and/ or conflict with the provisions of the
        Companies and Allied Matters Act (CAMA) 1990. Furthermore, in
        2009, a joint CBN/NDIC examination that led to the removal of 5
        CEOs of banks in the country revealed, amongst others, poor
        corporate governance practices in the institutions. There was also
        the need to up-date the code in order to align it with contemporary
        developments and international best practices, hence the need for
        the current review.

        Therefore, the revised Code provides clear guidelines on all aspects
        of governance and is expected to enhance Corporate
        Governance practices for banks in Nigeria.

        The provisions of this Code represent the minimum standard which
        banks shall comply. Banks are however encouraged to aspire to
        higher standards.

1.2 COMPLIANCE

1.2.1 This code shall apply to banks and discount houses.

1.2.2 External auditors of banks shall report annually to the CBN, the
        extent of the bank's compliance with the provisions of this Code.
        The external auditor must have adequate experience/knowledge
        and competence to assess the governance systems in banks and
        discount houses.

                                                               4
2.0    BOARD AND MANAGEMENT
2.1
2.1.1  Responsibilities of the Board and Management

2.1.2  The Board is accountable and responsible for the
2.1.3  performance and affairs of the bank. Specifically, and in line
2.1.4  with the provisions in the Companies and Allied Matters Act
2.1.5  (CAMA) 1990, Directors owe the bank the duty of care and
       loyalty and to act in the interest of the bank's employees and
2.1.6  other stakeholders.
2.1.7
       The Board shall define the bank's strategic goals, approve its
       long and short-term business strategies and monitor their
       implementation by management.

       The Board shall determine the skills, knowledge and
       experience that members require and work effectively as a
       team to achieve the bank's objectives.

       The Board shall ensure that its human, material and financial
       resources are effectively deployed towards the attainment of
       set goals of the bank.

       The Board shall appoint the CEO as well as top management
       staff and establish a framework for the delegation of authority
       in the bank, which must comply with the provisions of the
       CBN's Circular on Harmonization of Job Roles in the Banking
       Industry.

       The Board shall ensure that a succession plan is in place for the
       CEO, other executive Directors and top management staff.

       The Board shall set limits of authority, specifying the threshold
       for large transactions which it must approve before they take
       place. There shall be no exception for such large transactions.

                                                  5
2.1.8  Members of the Board are severally and jointly liable for the
2.1.9  activities of the bank.
2.2
2.2.1  The Board shall ensure strict adherence to the Code of
2.2.2  Conduct for bank Directors.

2.2.3  Size and Composition
2.2.4
       The size of the Board of any bank or discount house shall be
2.3    limited to a minimum of five (5) and a maximum of twenty
2.3.1  (20).

       Members of the Board shall be qualified persons of proven
       integrity and shall be knowledgeable in business and financial
       matters, in accordance with the extant CBN Guidelines on Fit
       and Proper Persons Regime.

       The Board shall consist of Executive and Non-Executive
       Directors. The number of Non-Executive Directors shall be more
       than that of Executive Directors.

       The Board of banks shall have at least two (2) Non-Executive
       Directors as Independent Directors while that of discount
       houses shall have at least one (1) as defined in the CBN
       guidelines on the Appointment of Independent Directors

       Separation of Powers

       The positions of the Board Chairman and the Managing
       Director/Chief Executive Officer (MD/CEO) shall be separate.
       No one person shall combine the two positions in any bank at
       the same time. For the avoidance of doubt, no executive Vice
       Chairman shall be recognized in the Board structure.

       6
2.3.2   Where the bank is a member of a holding company, not more
2.3.3   than two extended family members shall be allowed to serve
        on the Boards of the bank and the holding company.
2.4
2.4.1   No two members of the same extended family shall occupy
2.4.2   the positions of Chairman and MD/CEO or Executive Director
2.4.3   of the bank and Chairman or MD/CEO of a bank's subsidiary
2.4.4   at the same time.

2.4.5   Appointment and Tenure

        Procedure for appointment to the Board shall be formal,
        transparent and documented.

        Existing CBN guidelines on appointment to the Board of
        financial institutions shall continue to be applied.

        To ensure continuity and injection of fresh ideas, Non-Executive
        Directors of banks shall serve for a maximum of three (3) terms
        of four (4) years each.

        Track record of appointees shall be an additional eligibility
        requirement. Such records shall cover both integrity and past
        performance, in accordance with the extant CBN Guidelines
        on Fit and Proper Persons Regime.

       The tenure of the CEO of a bank shall be in accordance with
       the terms of engagement with the bank but subject to a
       maximum period of ten (10) years. Such tenure may be broken
       down into periods not exceeding five (5) years at a time.

       Such a CEO shall not be eligible for appointment in that
       capacity in the bank or its subsidiaries.

       7
2.4.6  No Director, either Executive or Non-Executive, shall be allowed
2.4.7  to serve on the Boards of a bank and a holding company
2.5    within a Group at the same time.
2.5.1
       To enhance the effectiveness of Directors, the bank shall allow
2.5.2  Directors access to corporate information under conditions of
2.5.3  confidentiality; provide training and continuing education
       arrangements and facilitate access to independent
       professional advice.

        Board Committees

        The Board shall establish at a minimum the following
        Committees:

         i) A Committee responsible for the oversight of Risk
                 Management and Audit functions. These functions may
                 be carried out by one committee, particularly in small
                 institutions. This is without prejudice to the requirements
                 of CAMA on the Statutory Audit Committee which is not
                 a board committee.

                 The Chief Risk Officer and Chief Internal Auditor must
                 report directly to Risk Management and Board Audit
                 Committees respectively.

         ii) Board Governance and Nominations Committee

        All Board Committees must have a charter which must be
        submitted to the CBN for approval.

        The Chairman of the Board shall not be a member/chairman
        of any Board Committee.

       8
2.5.4  Board Committees shall be headed by Non-Executive
2.5.5  Directors.
2.6
2.6.1  The Board Audit Committee (BAC) shall have unlimited access
2.6.2  to the financial records of the bank including external auditors'
       reports.
2.6.3
2.7    Board Meetings
2.7.1
2.7.2  To effectively perform its oversight function and monitor
       management's performance, the Board shall meet at least
2.7.3  once a quarter.

       Every Director is required to attend all meetings of the Board
       and Board Committees. In order to qualify for re-election, a
       Director must have attended at least two-thirds of all Board
       and Board Committee meetings.

       The Board shall disclose, in the Corporate Governance Section
       of the Annual Report, the total number of Board meetings held
       in the financial year and attendance by each Director.

       Remuneration

       Banks shall align executive and Board remuneration with the
       long term interests of the bank and its shareholders.

       Levels of remuneration shall be sufficient to attract, retain and
       motivate executive officers of the bank and this shall be
       balanced against the bank's interest in not paying excessive
       remuneration.

       Where remuneration is linked to performance, it shall be
       designed in such a way as to prevent excessive risk taking.

       9
2.7.4   Every bank shall have a remuneration policy put in place by
2.7.5   the Board of Directors, which shall be disclosed to the
2.7.6   shareholders in the annual report.
2.7.7
        A Committee of Non-Executive Directors shall determine the
2.7.8   remuneration of executive Directors.

2.7.9   Executive Directors shall not receive sitting allowances and
2.7.10  Directors' fees.
2.7.11
2.7.12  Non-Executive Directors' (Non-EDs) remuneration shall be
        limited to Directors' fees, sitting allowances for Board and
        Board Committee meetings and reimbursable travel and hotel
        expenses. Non-EDs shall not receive benefits, salaries, etc,
        whether in cash or in kind, other than those mentioned above.

        Where stock options are adopted as part of executive
        remuneration or compensation, the Board shall ensure that
        they are not priced at a discount except with the
        authorization of the relevant regulatory agencies.

        Share options shall be tied to performance and subject to the
        approval of the shareholders at AGMs.

        Share options shall not be exercisable until one year after the
        expiration of the tenure of the Director.

        Banks shall disclose in their annual reports, details of the shares
        held by Directors and their related parties.

        Where there is a Remuneration Committee in addition to the
        three Committees prescribed in Section 2.5.1, the membership
        shall comprise Non- EDs only while the Board Governance and
        Nomination Committee shall have a combination of Executive

        10
2.8    and Non-EDs. However, where both Committees are
2.8.1  combined, its membership shall be drawn only from Non-EDs.

2.8.2  Board Appraisal
2.8.3
       There shall be annual Board and Directors' review/appraisal
       covering all aspects of the Boards' structure, composition,
       responsibilities, processes and relationships, as may be
       prescribed by the CBN.

       Each Board should identify and adopt, in the light of the
       company's future strategy, its critical success factors or key
       strategic objectives.

       The annual Board appraisal shall be conducted by an
       independent consultant. The report shall be presented to
       shareholders at the AGM and a copy forwarded to the CBN.

       11
3.0    SHAREHOLDERS
3.1
3.1.1  Rights and Functions of Shareholders
3.1.2
3.1.3  Shareholders shall have the right to obtain relevant and
       material information from the bank on a timely and regular
3.2    basis.
3.2.1
       Shareholders shall have the right to participate actively and
3.2.2  vote in general meetings.
3.3
3.3.1  In addition to the traditional means of communication, banks
       shall have a website and are encouraged to communicate
       with shareholders via the website. Such information shall
       include major developments in the bank, risk management
       practices, executive compensation, local and offshore branch
       expansion, establishment of investment in subsidiaries and
       associates, Board and top management appointments,
       sustainability initiatives and practices, etc.

       Equity Ownership

       An equity holding of 5% and above by any investor shall be
       subject to CBN's prior approval. Where such shares are
       acquired through the capital market, the bank shall apply for
       a no objection letter from the CBN immediately after the
       acquisition.

       In order to discourage government(s) from having majority
       shareholding in banks, government(s) direct and indirect
       equity holding in any bank shall be limited to 10%.

       Protection of Shareholders' Rights

       Every shareholder shall be treated fairly.

                                                  12
3.3.2  The Board shall ensure that minority shareholders are
3.3.3  adequately protected from overbearing influence of
       controlling shareholders.
3.4
3.4.1  The Board shall ensure that the bank promptly provides to
3.4.2  shareholders documentary evidence of ownership interest in
3.4.3  the bank such as share certificates, dividend warrants and
       related instruments. Where these are rendered electronically,
3.4.4  the Board shall ensure that they are sent in a secure manner.
3.5
3.5.1  Meetings

       Notice of general meetings shall be as prescribed by the
       Companies and Allied Matters Act (CAMA) 1990.

       The Board shall ensure that the venue of a general meeting
       shall be convenient and easily accessible to the majority of
       shareholders.

       The Board shall ensure that unrelated issues for consideration
       are not lumped together at general meetings. Statutory
       business shall be clearly and separately set out. Separate
       resolutions shall be proposed and voted on each substantial
       issue.

       The Board shall ensure that decisions reached at general
       meetings are properly and fully implemented.

       Shareholders' Associations

       The Board shall ensure that dealings of the bank with
       shareholders' associations are in strict adherence with the
       Code for Shareholders' Associations published by the
       Securities and Exchange Commission. Where a bank is not

       13
listed, its dealings with the Association shall be transparent and
in line with the relevant governance codes.

                                          14
4.0    RIGHTS OF OTHER STAKEHOLDERS
4.1.1
       Stakeholders shall be able to freely communicate their
4.1.2  concerns about illegal or unethical practices to the Board.
4.1.3  Where such concerns border on the activities of the Board,
       such individuals shall have recourse to CBN in accordance
       with Section 3.4 of the provisions of the Whistle Blowing
       Guidelines.

       Where stakeholder interests are protected by law,
       stakeholders shall have the opportunity to obtain effective
       redress for violation of their rights.

       Banks shall demonstrate good sense of corporate social
       responsibility to their stakeholders such as customers,
       employees, host communities, and the general public.

       15
5.0    DISCLOSURE AND TRANSPARENCY
5.1.1
       In order to foster good corporate governance, banks are
5.1.2  encouraged to make robust disclosures beyond the statutory
       requirements in BOFIA 1991 as amended, CAMA 1990 and
       other applicable laws.

       Disclosure in the annual report shall include, but not limited to,
       material information on:

       (a) Major items that have been estimated in accordance
             with applicable accounting and auditing standards.

       (b) Rationale for all material estimates;

       (c) Details on Directors:

                i. The bank's remuneration policy for members of the
                     Board and executives;

               ii. Total Non-EDs' remuneration, including fees,
                     allowances, etc;

              iii. Total Executive compensation, including bonuses
                     paid/payable;

              iv. Details and reasons for share buy-backs, if any,
                     during the period under review;

              v. Board of Directors' performance evaluation; and
              vi. Details of Directors, shareholders and their related

                     parties who own 5% and above of the banks' shares
                     as well as other shareholders who, in concert with
                     others, control the bank.

       (d) Corporate governance:

           i. governance structure;

       16
    ii. composition of Board Committees including names of
        chairmen and members of each Committee

(e) Risk Assets:

       i. Concentration of assets, liabilities and off-balance
             sheet engagements by sector, geography, and
             product.

      ii. Loan quality.
      iii. Lending/borrowing to/from subsidiaries and

             associates.
     iv. Loans and advances/funding or commitment lines

             from institutions outside Nigeria.
      v. Related party transactions.
     vi. Insider-related credits in accordance with the extant

             CBN circular.

(f) Risk management:

       i. All significant risks.
      ii. Risk management practices indicating the Board's

             responsibility for the entire process of risk
             management as well as a summary of external
             auditors' observed lapses thereon.

(g) Information on strategic modification to the core business.

(h) All regulatory/supervisory contraventions during the year
      under review and infractions uncovered through whistle
      blowing, including actions taken thereon.

(i) Regulatory Sanctions and Penalties

(j) Capital Structure/Adequacy.

                                           17
5.2    (k) Any service contracts and other contractual relationships
5.2.1        with related parties.

5.2.2  (l) Frauds and Forgeries.
       (m) Contingency Planning Framework.
5.2.3  (n) Any matter not specifically mentioned in this code but
5.2.4
             which is capable of affecting in a significant form, the
             financial condition of the bank or its status as a going
             concern.

       Transparency and Integrity in Reporting

       Banks shall have a structure to independently verify and
       safeguard the integrity of their financial reporting, which shall:

          i. entail the review and consideration of the financial
                statements by the BAC; and

         ii. enhance the independence and competence of the
                bank's external auditors.

       The BAC shall be structured in such a way that it:

           i. consists only of Non-Executive Directors;

          ii. is chaired by an independent Director;

          iii. has at least three members.

       The BAC shall be of sufficient size, independence and
       technical expertise to discharge its mandate effectively.

       The BAC shall include members who are financially literate
       (that is, be able to read and understand financial statements).
       At least one of the members shall have relevant qualifications

                                                  18
5.2.5   and experience (that is, shall be a qualified accountant or
5.2.6   other finance professional with experience in financial and
5.2.7   accounting matters).
5.2.8
        The BAC shall review the integrity of the bank's financial
5.2.9   reporting and oversee the independence of the external
5.2.10  auditors.

        The BAC shall meet at least once every quarter.

        The appointment and removal of the Chief Compliance
        Officer/ Head of Internal Audit shall be the responsibility of the
        Board subject to CBN's ratification. The CBN must be notified of
        any change and reasons thereof, within fourteen (14) days of
        such change.

        The qualification and experience of the Chief Compliance
        Officer/ Head of Internal Audit shall be in accordance with the
        provisions of the CBN's Competency Framework for the
        Banking Industry.

        Chief Compliance Officers (CCO) shall, in addition to
        monitoring compliance with Anti-Money Laundering and
        Combating the Financing of Terrorism (AML/CFT) requirements,
        monitor the implementation of the corporate governance
        code.

        Appointment of external auditors shall be approved by the
        CBN.

        External auditors shall render reports to the CBN on banks' risk
        management practices, internal controls and level of
        compliance with regulatory directives.

        19
5.2.11   i. The external auditor shall review the work of the internal
                 auditor on each of the bank's key risk elements to cover
                 risk identification, measurement, monitoring and control.
                 The key risk elements as specified in the Risk Based
                 Supervision framework are strategic, operational,
                 liquidity, legal, market and credit risks.

         ii. The external auditor shall review compliance with
                 policies and internal control procedures put in place by
                 the Board to manage and mitigate the institution's risks.

        iii. The external auditors shall report on the level of each
                 key risk element as well as the composite risk profile of
                 the bank and make recommendations to the Board to
                 enhance the effectiveness of risk management
                 processes in the bank.

        iv. Copies of their report shall be forwarded to the CBN
                 together with the external auditor's management letter
                 on the bank's audited financial statements

        External auditors of banks shall not provide client services that
        shall amount to conflict of interest including the following:

          i. Bookkeeping or other services related to the
                 accounting records or financial statements of the audit
                 client;

          ii. Appraisal or valuation services, fairness opinion or
                 contribution-in-kind reports;

         iii. Actuarial services;

         iv. Internal audit outsourcing services;

        20
5.2.12   v. Management or human resource functions including
                broker or dealer, investment banking services and legal
5.2.13          or expert services.

5.3     The tenure of auditors in a given bank shall be for a maximum
5.3.1   period of ten (10) cumulative years after which the audit firm
5.3.2   shall not be reappointed in the bank until after a period of
        another ten (10) consecutive years.

        An audit firm shall not provide audit services to a bank if one of
        the bank's top officials (Directors, Chief Finance Officer, Chief
        Audit Officer, etc) was employed by the firm and worked on
        the bank's audit during the immediate past two (2) years.

        Whistle ­ Blowing

        Banks shall have a whistle-blowing policy made known to
        employees and other stakeholders.

        The policy shall contain mechanisms, including assurance of
        confidentiality, that encourage all stakeholders to report any
        unethical activity to the bank and/or the CBN.

        21
6.0    RISK MANAGEMENT
6.1.1
       Every bank shall have a risk management framework
6.1.2  specifying the governance architecture, policies, procedures
       and processes for the identification, measurement, monitoring
6.1.3  and control of the risks inherent in its operations.
6.1.4
6.1.5  The Board is responsible for the bank's policies on risk oversight
6.1.6  and management and shall satisfy itself that management has
       developed and implemented a sound system of risk
6.1.7  management and internal control.

       Risk management policies shall reflect the bank's risk profile
       and appetite and clearly describe all elements of the risk
       management as well as its internal control system.
       Banks shall disclose a summary of its risk management policies.

       A bank's risk management policies shall clearly describe the
       roles and responsibilities of the Board, BRMC, management
       and internal audit function.

       As part of its oversight for the risk management and internal
       control system, the Board shall review the effectiveness of the
       implementation of that system at least annually. Ultimate
       responsibility for risk oversight and risk management rests with
       the full Board.

       It is the responsibility of the Board to prepare the bank's risk
       management framework as well as oversight responsibility for
       its implementation. However, the management has the
       responsibility for the effective implementation of the
       framework.

       22
6.1.8  The composition of the BRMC shall include at least 2 non-EDs
6.1.9  and the executive Director in charge of risk management but
       chaired by a non-ED.

       External auditors shall render annually, reports on the bank's
       risk management practices to the CBN.

       23
7.0    ETHICS & PROFESSIONALISM AND CONFLICT OF INTEREST
7.1
7.1.1  Ethics & Professionalism
7.1.2
       To make ethical and responsible decisions, banks shall comply
7.1.3  with their legal obligations and have regard to the reasonable
       expectations of their stakeholders.

       Banks shall establish a code of conduct and disclose in the
       code or a summary of the code such information as:

            i. the practices necessary to maintain confidence in
                    the bank's integrity;

           ii. the practices necessary to take into account their
                    legal obligations and the reasonable expectations of
                    their stakeholders;

          iii. the responsibility and accountability of individuals
                    reporting and investigating reports of unethical
                    practices.

       The Code should:

       (a) commit the bank, its Board and management (and
               employees) to the highest standards of professional
               behaviour, business conduct and sustainable business
               practices;

       (b) be developed in collaboration with management and
               employees;

       (c) receive commitment for its implementation from the
               Board and the Managing Director/Chief Executive
               Officer and individual Directors of the company;

       (d) be sufficiently detailed as to give clear guidance to users
               including advisers, consultants and contractors;

                                                  24
7.1.4  (e) be formally communicated to the persons to whom it
7.1.5          applies; and

7.1.7  (f) be reviewed regularly and updated when necessary.
7.2
7.2.1  Banks shall establish a policy concerning trading in the bank's
7.2.2  securities by Directors, senior executives and employees, and
7.2.3  disclose the policy or a summary of that policy.
7.2.4
7.2.5  The trading policy shall contain appropriate compliance
       standards and procedures to ensure that the policy is properly
       implemented. There shall also be an internal review
       mechanism to assess compliance and effectiveness. This
       review may involve an internal audit function.

       Banks shall publish the policy concerning the issue of Board
       and employee trading in its securities.

       Conflict of Interest

       Banks shall adopt a policy to guide the Board and individual
       Directors in conflict of interest situations.

       The Board of Directors shall be responsible for managing
       conflicts of interest.

       Directors shall promptly disclose to the Board any real or
       potential conflict of interest that they may have regarding any
       matter that may come before the Board or its Committees.

       Directors shall abstain from discussions and voting on any
       matter in which they have or may have a conflict of interest.

       Directors who are aware of a real, potential or perceived
       conflict of interest on the part of a fellow Director, have a
       responsibility to promptly raise the issue for clarification, either

                                                  25
7.2.6  with the Director concerned or with the Chairman of the
       Board.

       Disclosure by a Director of a real, potential or perceived
       conflict of interest or a decision by the Board as to whether a
       conflict of interest exists shall be recorded in the minutes of the
       meeting.

       26
8.0    SANCTIONS
8.1.1
8.1.2  Compliance with the code is mandatory for all banks and
       discount houses.
8.1.3
       Returns on the status of each institution's compliance with the
       code shall be rendered to the CBN at the end of every quarter
       or as may be specified from time to time by the CBN.

       Failure to comply with the code will attract appropriate
       sanctions in accordance with Section 60 of BOFIA 1991 as
       amended or may be specified in any applicable legislation or
       regulation.

       27
9.0    EFFECTIVE DATE
9.1.1
       This code shall take effect from October 1, 2014 and
       supersedes our "Code of Corporate Governance for Banks in
       Nigeria Post Consolidation" that became effective on April 3,
       2006.

       28
GUIDELINES FOR WHISTLE-BLOWING
FOR BANKS AND OTHER FINANCIAL

        INSTITUTIONS IN NIGERIA

                                                                                                         May 2014
TABLE OF CONTENT

SECTION DESCRIPTION

1.0  Introduction

2.0  Scope of the Guidelines

3.0  Whistle-blowing Procedures

4.0  Protection of the Whistle Blower

                              2
I.0 INTRODUCTION

        The prevalence of misconduct in organizations, particularly banks
        and other financial institutions,in the recent past underscores the
        need to institute rigorous policies to allow employees and other
        stakeholders bring unethical and illegal practices to the fore to
        minimize the damage such misconduct can cause to different
        stakeholders.

        The banking system relies on the effective operation of a range of
        "integrity systems" for keeping the institutions and their
        management honest and accountable. One of such systems is
        Whistle-blowing.

        Whistle-blowing, therefore, is the reporting of alleged unethical
        conduct of employees, management, directors and other
        stakeholders of an institution by an employee or other person to
        appropriate authorities.

        A whistle-blower is any person(s) including the employee,
        management, directors, depositors, service providers, creditors and
        other stakeholder(s) of an institution who reports any form of
        unethical behavior or dishonesty to the appropriate authority.

        The objective of whistle-blowing is to encourage stakeholders to
        bring unethical conduct and illegal violations to the attention of an
        internal and or external authority so that action can be taken to
        resolve the problem. This will minimize the institution's exposure to the
        damage that can occur when internal mechanisms are
        circumvented. It will also demonstrate to stakeholders that the
        institution is serious about adherence to codes of ethics and
        conduct.

                                                               3
It is believed that an effective whistle-blowing mechanism in banks
and Other Financial Institutions (OFIs) in the country would go along
way in entrenching good corporate governance.
However, in order to gain the protection afforded to whistle-blowers
by this guidelines, such disclosures must actually be made in good
faith and the information provided must also be substantially
true/reliable.
The provisions of these Guidelines represent the minimum standard
of whistle-blowing which banks shall comply with. Banks and other
financial institutions are however encouraged to aspire to higher
standards.

                                                     4
1.2 COMPLIANCE
1.2.1 The provisions of these Guidelines shall be observed by all financial

        institutions under the supervisory purview of the Central Bank of
        Nigeria (CBN).
1.2.2 Compliance shall be mandatory with effect from October 1, 2014.
1.2.3 Banks and Other Financial Institutions are expected to forward
        copies of their whistle-blowing guidelines to the CBN within three
        months, effective from the date of issuance of the guidelines. These
        guidelines shall be updated from time to time as the need arises.
1.2.4 Banks and Other Financial Institutions shall render quarterly reports
        on their compliance with the provisions of the whistle-blowing
        guidelines along with their corporate governance compliance
        status returns.
1.2.5 The external auditor of each bank and other financial institution shall
        report annually to the CBN, the extent of the bank's and other
        financial institution's compliance with the provisions of these
        Guidelines.

                                                               5
2.0 SCOPE OF POLICY
        These Guidelines are designed to enable stakeholders of banks and
        other financial institutions to report acts of impropriety to
        appropriate authorities. This may include any of the following:
                 All forms of financial malpractice or impropriety or fraud;
                 Failure to comply with a legal obligation or Statutes;
                 Actions detrimental to Health & Safety or the environment;
                 Any form of criminal activity;
                 Improper conduct or unethical behaviour;
                 Failure to comply with regulatory directives;
                 Other forms of corporate governance breaches;
                 Connected transactions;
                 Insider abuses
                 Non-disclosure of interest;
                 Attempts to conceal any of these, etc

                                                               6
3.0  WHISTLE ­ BLOWING PROCEDURES

3.1  Banks and other financial institutions shall have a whistle­

     blowing policy which shall be made known to employees,

     management, directors and other stakeholders such as

     contractors, shareholders, job applicants and the general

     public. The policy should be disclosed in their web sites.

3.2  It is the responsibility of the board to implement such a policy

     and to establish a whistle-blowing mechanism for reporting

     any illegal or unethical behavior.

3.3  Banks and other financial institutions shall establish whistle-

     blowing procedures that encourage stakeholders by

     assurance of confidentiality, to report any unethical

     activity/breach of these Guidelines using, among others, a

     dedicated email or hotline to the bank, other financial

     institution and the CBN.

3.4  The whistle-blowing mechanism shall include a dedicated

     "hot­line" or e­mail address and other electronic devices that

     could be used anonymously to report unethical practices.

3.5  The Head of Internal Audit shall review reported cases and

     recommend appropriate action to the MD/CEO and where

     issues affect Executive Management, such issues should be

     referred to the Board. The Board or CEO shall take appropriate

     action to redress the situation within a reasonable time.

3.6  The Head of Internal Audit shall provide the Chairman of the

     Board Audit Committee with a summary of cases reported

     and the result of the investigation.

3.7  A whistle­blower shall disclose any information connected with

     the activities of the bank or other financial institution which

     indicates any of the following:

                               7
     (i) that an infraction has been committed;

     (ii) that a person has failed to comply with banking laws,
           internal policies and procedures, etc; and

     (iii) that someone has concealed matters falling within (i) or
           (ii) above.

3.8  A disclosure is deemed to have been made in accordance

     with this section if the whistle-blower discloses to the bank,

     other financial institution, CBN, and/or other appropriate

     agencies or exercise any other lawful option provided that

     such disclosure is:

     (i) true; and

     (ii) reasonable;

                          8
4.0       PROTECTION OF THEWHISTLE-BLOWER

4.1       These Guidelines is designed to offer protection to whistle-

          blower(s) who disclose such concerns provided the disclosure

          is made:

          a) in the reasonable belief that it is intended to show
                  malpractice or impropriety; and

          b) to an appropriate person or authority.

4.2       Banks and other financial institutions shall treat all disclosures

          resulting from whistle-blowing in a confidential manner. The

          identity of the whistle-blower shall be kept confidential.

4.3       Stakeholders are encouraged to disclose their name when

          filing reports to make their reports more credible. However,

          anonymous disclosures may be considered on discretionary

          basis taking into account the following factors:

          a) the seriousness of the issues;
          b) the significance and credibility of the concern; and
          c) the possibility of confirming the allegation.

     4.4  In making a disclosure through whistle-blowing, the individual

          should exercise due care in reporting his concern. If, however,

          an individual makes malicious allegations, and particularly if

          he or she persists with making them, no action shall be taken.

     4.5  No bank or other financial institution shall subject a whistle-

          blower to any detriment whatsoever on the grounds that s/he

          has made a disclosure in accordance with the provisions of

          these Guidelines.

                             9
4.6   Where a whistle-blower has been subjected to any detriment

      in contravention of the above, s/he may present a complaint

      to the CBN. This is without prejudice to the right of the whistle-

      blower to take appropriate legal action.

4.7   An employee who has suffered any detriment by reason of

      disclosure made pursuant to the provision of these Guidelines

      shall be entitled to compensation and/or reinstatement

      provided that in the case of compensation, the employee's

      entitlement shall be computed as if he had attained the

      maximum age of retirement or had completed the maximum

      period of service, in accordance with his condition of service.

      For other stakeholders, the whistle-blower shall be adequately

      compensated.

4.8   Any bank or other financial institution which contravenes the

      provision of this section of the Guidelines will be sanctioned in

      line with Section 60 of the Banks and Other Financial Institutions

      Act 1991 (as amended).

4.9   For the purpose of these Guidelines, the word "detriment

      includes dismissal, termination, redundancy, undue influence,

      duress, withholding of benefits and/or entitlements and any

      other act that has negative impact on the whistle-blower.

4.10  Banks and other financial institutions shall make quarterly

      returns to the CBN and NDIC on all whistle-blowing reports and

      corporate governance related breaches.

4.11  Banks and other financial institutions shall include a whistle-

      blowing compliance status report in their audited financial

      statements.

4.12  Banks and other financial institutions should review their

      whistle-blowing policies every three (3) years and notify the

      regulatory authorities of all such reviews.

                              10
