COURSE
GUIDE

CLL 809
LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

Course Team

Prof. Augustine R. Agom (Course
Developer/Writer)
Prof. D.C. John (Course Editor)
Dr. Ernest O. Ugbejeh (Dean)

NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
i

CLL 809

COURSE GUIDE

© 2022 by NOUN Press
National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters
University Village
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway
Jabi, Abuja
Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng
URL: www.nou.edu.ng

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any
form or by any means, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Printed 2022
ISBN: 978-978-058-499-3

ii

CONTENTS
Introduction………………………………………
Working through this Course……………………
Course Materials…………………………………
Modules and Study Units………………………..
References /Further Reading……………………..
Assessment………………………………………..
Self-Assessment Exercises………………………..
Final Examination and Grading…………………..
Course Score Distribution………………………..
How to get the Most from the Course…………….
Tutors and Tutorials………………………………

iv
iv
iv
v
v
vii
vii
viii
ix
x
x

iii

CLL 809

COURSE GUIDE

INTRODUCTION
The maritime industry is very important in the conduct of the business of
the carriage of persons, goods and services. It is feasibly the most costeffective way to move large cargoes from one country to another over a
large distance. According to the International Maritime organisation
(IMO) over 90% of the worlds trade is carried by sea. The contribution of
marine transport in the movement of industrial plants, machinery,
equipment, goods and services across long distance is indeed immense.
The associated challenges of maritime mishap can be quite ruinous
without a hedging scheme to protect maritime stakeholders. Maritime
activities would simply be impossible without the risk mitigating presence
of marine insurance.
WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE.
The course is divided into two: Law of Marine Insurance 1(CLL805) and
Marine Insurance 11(CLL815). Law of Marine Insurance 1 provides a
basic understanding of the regulatory framework for marine insurance law
in Nigeria. Law of Marine Insurance 311 is an expose on the legal issues
in marine insurance. Right and obligations of parties to marine insurance
contracts and the legal relationship of marine insurance intermediaries are
discussed. These are undertaken as specific issues under the various study
units in very simple and digestible language.
COURSE MATERIALS
The major components of the course are.
a)
b)
c)
d)
e)

Course Guide
Study Units
Textbooks
Assignment File/Seminar Paper
Presentation Schedule

STUDY UNITS
This course is divided into four (4) module and broken down to 12 study
units as follows –
Module 1-Nature of Marine Insurance Law
Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3

iv

Importance of Marine Insurance
Meaning of Marine Insurance Contract
Nature of Marine Insurance Contract

CLL 809

COURSE GUIDE

Module 2 Historical Development of Marine Insurance
Unit 1 Pre-colonial Era
Unit 2 Post-Colonial Era
Unit 3 Institutional Framework for the Regulation of Marine Insurance
Law in Nigeria
Module 3 Classification of Marine Insurance
Unit 1 Mutual Insurance and Commercial Insurance
Unit 2 Kinds of Marine Policies
Module 4 General Principles of Marine Insurance
Unit 1 Good Faith (Uberrimae Fidei)
Unit 2 Insurable Interest
Unit 3 Subrogation
Unit 4 Double Insurance and Contribution
All these units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and
values, which merit your attention and thought. Tackle them in separate
study periods, you may require several hours for each.
We suggest that the modules be studied one after the other, since they are
linked by a common theme. You will gain more from them if you have
first carried out work on the law of contract. You will then have a clearer
picture into which to paint these topics. Subsequent units are written on
the assumption that you have completed previous units.
Each study unit consists of one week’s work and includes specific
Learning Outcomes, directions for study, reading materials and SelfAssessment Exercises (SAE). Together, these exercises will assist you in
achieving the stated Learning Outcomes of the individual units and of the
course.
REFERENCES / FURTHER READING
References and further reading materials are provided at the end of each
study unit. The need to consult these materials cannot be overemphasised
to deepen and broaden understanding of the issues at stake. You should
read them where so directed before attempting the exercise.
ASSESSMENT
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor-Marked
Assignments and a written examination. In doing these assignments you
are expected to apply knowledge acquired during the course. The
v

CLL 809

COURSE GUIDE

assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the
Assignment file. The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment
will count for 30% of your total score
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
Self-assessment questions are raised at the end of each module to measure
the level of successful engagement with the legal issues covered. The
answers in the body of the main text are distilled and put up at the end of
the course material. This will enable you to understand and apply legal
principles to practical situations in resolving legal matters in the field of
marine insurance law.
FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING
The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and
will carry 70% of the total course grade. The examination will consist of
questions, which reflect the kinds of self-assessment exercises and the
tutor marked problems you have previously encountered. All aspects of
the course will be assessed. You should use the time between completing
the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course. You
may find it useful to review yourself assessment exercises and tutor
marked assignments before the examination.
COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION
The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken
down.
Assessment
Marks
Assignments 1-4 (the best three of Four assignments. Best three
all the assignments submitted)
marks of the four counts at 30%
of course marks.
Final examination
70% of overall course score
Total
100% of course score.
Course Overview and Presentation Schedule
Module /
Title of Work
Weeks Assessment
Unit
Activity
(End of
Unit)
Assignment
MODULE NATURE OF MARINE
1
1
INSURANCE LAW
Unit 1
Importance of Marine Insurance
Unit 2
Meaning of Marine Insurance
Contract

vi

CLL 809

COURSE GUIDE

Unit 3

Nature of Marine Insurance
Contract
MODULE HISTORICAL
2
DEVELOPMENT OF
MARINE INSURANCE
Unit 1
Pre-Colonial Era
Unit 2
Post-Colonial Era
Unit 3
Institutional Framework for the
Regulation of Marine Insurance
Law in Nigeria
MODULE CLASSIFICATION OF
3
MARINE INSURANCE
Unit 1
Mutual Insurance and
Commercial Insurance
Unit 2
Kinds of Marine Policies
MODULE GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF
4
MARINE INSURANCE
Unit 1
Good faith (Uberrimae Fidei)
Unit 2
Insurable Interest
Unit 3
Subrogation
Unit 4
Double Insurance and
Contribution

Assignment
2

Assignment
3

Assignment
4

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THE COURSE
It is very important that the discussion on this course is participatory. It is
equally important that the references are consulted. The effusive
references to provisions of the Marine Insurance Act, 2004 in the course
guide is to enable you become very familiar with the law.
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS
There are 11 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You
will be notified of the dates, times and location of the tutorials, together
with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are
allocated a tutorial group. Your tutor will mark and comment on your
assignments. Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties
you might encounter. Your tutor may help and provide assistance to you
during the course. You must send your Tutor Marked Assignments to
your tutor well before the due date. They will be marked by your tutor
and returned to you as soon as possible.
Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if:


You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned
readings.
vii

CLL 809




COURSE GUIDE

You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your
tutor’s comments on an assignment or with the grading of an
assignment.

You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance to
have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are
answered instantly. You can raise any problem encountered in the course
of your study. To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare
a question list before attending them. You will gain a lot from
participating actively.

viii

CLL 809

COURSE GUIDE

Module / Unit
MODULE 1 NATURE OF MARINE INSURANCE
LAW
 Unit 1 Importance of Marine Insurance
 Unit 2 Meaning of Marine Insurance Contract
 Unit 3 Nature of Marine Insurance Contract

MODULE 2 HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF
MARINE INSURANCE
 Unit 1 Pre-Colonial Era
 Unit 2 Post-Independence Era
 Unit 3 Institutional Framework for the Regulation of
Marine Insurance in Nigeria

Page
13
19
23

28
33
37

MODULE 3 CLASSIFICATION OF MARINE
INSURANCE
 Unit 1 Mutual Insurance and Commercial Insurance
 Unit 2 Kinds of Marine Policies

43
46

MODULE 4 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MARINE
INSURANCE
 Unit 1 Good faith (Uberrimae Fidei)
 Unit 2 Insurable Interest
 Unit 3 Subrogation
 Unit 4 Double Insurance and Contribution

49
54
58
61

ix

MAIN
COURSE

Module 1

Nature of Marine Insurance Law

Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3

Importance of Marine Insurance……
1
Meaning of Marine Insurance Contract…1
Nature of Marine Insurance Contract…. 8

Module 2

Historical Development of Marine
Insurance………………………….

Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3

16

Pre-colonial Era……………………
Post-Colonial Era…………………..
Institutional Framework for the
Regulation of Marine Insurance
Law in Nigeria………………………

16
22

Module 3

Classification of Marine Insurance

31

Unit 1

Mutual Insurance and Commercial
Insurance…………………………….
Kinds of Marine Policies…………….

31
35

General Principles of Marine
Insurance……………………………

39

Good Faith (Uberrimae Fidei)………..
Insurable Interest……………………..
Subrogation…………………………..
Double Insurance and Contribution….

42
44
46
48

Unit 2
Module 4

Unit 1
Unit 2
Unit 3
Unit 4

29

CLL809

MODULE 1

MODULE 1
UNIT 1

NATURE OF MARINE INSURANCE LAW

IMPORTANCE OF MARINE INSURANCE

UNIT STRUCTURE
1.1
Introduction
1.2
Learning Outcomes
1.3
Importance of Marine Insurance
1.3.1 Benefits
1.4
Risks and Features of Marine Insurance
1.5
Summary
1.6
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
1.7
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction
Generally, this module shows why the law of marine insurance occupies
a pride of place in Nigeria’s legal system and in the legal systems of all
serious nations of the world Maritime adventure has tremendous benefits
to nations of the world. It is however fraught with risks that are
mitigated by marine insurance.

1.2 Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 discuss the contributions marine insurance makes to a country’s
economy and global relations.

1.3 Importance of Marine Insurance
Marine insurance has everything to do with maritime activities. Coastal
nations are directly in the frontline of marine insurance business. Nigeria
is a coastal country with large inland waterways to complement. The
ocean and waterways provide marine transport for goods, services and
hospitality. The country is a major player in global maritime industry.
Nigeria’s major export earning is from crude oil sales transported across
the sea to trading partners. Plants, machinery and technological
equipment are imported through the country’s waterways. There is no
gainsaying the fact that marine insurance bears directly on Nigeria’s
economy as a maritime hub. What then are the benefits of marine
insurance?

1

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

1.3.1 Benefits
1.3.1 Marine Insurance is a Major Boost to Maritime Activities
through Loss Mitigation

It enables the ship owner, buyer and seller of goods and financiers to
carry on their business while relieving themselves of the profound fear
of burdensome financial consequences of assets loss. Hull and
machinery coverage is designed to insure risks to the vessel itself.
Modern commercial ships are larger and more valuable than before in
terms of financial outlay. These vessels are often mortgaged and the
financial entities that financed the purchase or construction may require
the ship owners to maintain highly rated hull and machinery insurance
covering the vessel and its equipment. The cargo carried on the vessel is
often highly valuable. Modern container vessels can carry large numbers
of containers, bulk carriers may carriers may hold hundreds of thousands
of tons of commodities, and supertankers may store up millions of
barrels of oil. Such high value cargo underscores the need for insurance
coverage. Considering what is involved, insurers may syndicate the
coverage by the involvement of others through co-insurance or reinsurance especially when the value is high and consequently the risks
for one firm to adequately provide a cover. Commercial maritime
voyages also carry risks to third parties, including the possibility of
collision, personal injury, marine pollution and other open liabilities.
Marine insurance safeguards against these perils.
1.3.2 The nation’s maritime sector is a major employer of labour and
contributor to the country’s gross domestic product. Stevedoring
companies and allied businesses engage labour and stimulate
economic activities thereby. Credit financiers are directly and
indirectly impacted upon as a result of maritime activities through
the provision of letters of credit and different financial
accommodation rendered to the sector. All these exist and play
their distinctive economic roles because the indeterminate risks
of maritime life are hedged by marine insurance.
1.3.3 Nations operating port activities with commercial and hospitality
travels into each other’s port have mutual interest to protect and
respect for each other’s economic interests. This aids
international relations and co-operations. Marine insurance
provides a leverage and backup for international investments. The
assurance of indemnity makes international trade worth the risk
and provides an encouragement for trade and finance. Modern
marine insurance is more than a tool of risk management.
2

CLL809

MODULE 1

1.3.4 Marine insurance has become a tool for preserving international
order and peace. Recently the international community has
resorted to marine insurance prohibitions to address security
concerns emanating from Iran and North Korea. In 2002 and
2006, Iran publicly announced progress in building nuclear
reactor and enriched uranium. This was followed with missile
tests which were randomly condemned as threat to world peace.
In 2010, the United Nations Security Council issued a wide
variety of sanctions against Iran in Resolution 1929. The
resolution banned the supply of enrichment related technology to
Iran and called on all States to inspect and seize vessels
reasonably believed to be involved in the prohibited nuclear
activities. The resolution also called on States to prevent the
provision of financial services, including insurance or reinsurance
when there are reasonable grounds to believe these services
would contribute to Iran’s weapon’s programme. A United
Kingdom Treasury Order in 2009 banned all persons operating in
the UK financial sector from transacting any business with the
Iranian national carrier, the Islamic Republic of Iran Shipping
Lines. This effectively shut out the liner’s access to the Lloyds of
London marine insurance market. This had a considerable impact
on the vessel’s ability to maintain adequate insurance and engage
in lucrative maritime trade. In like manner, the European Union
in Article 11, EU Council Regulation 267/2012 states “It shall be
prohibited…to provide, directly or indirectly, financing or
financial assistance, including financial derivatives, as well as
insurance and re-insurance related to the import, purchase or
transport of crude oil and petroleum products of Iranian origin or
that have been imported from Iran” This had considerable impact
on the Iranian economy and the country had to return to the
negotiating table on the matter leading to the Joint
Comprehensive Plan of Action (JCPOA) with the UN in 2015
requiring the country to cease uranium enrichment, dismantle its
nuclear programme and allow inspection by the UN International
Atomic Energy Agency in return for lifting of sanctions. In Arash
Shipping v. Groupama [2011] EWCA (Civ) 620(Eng.) a
composite insurance policy over the Iranian fleet of oil tankers,
one of the largest oil tankers in the world, was cancelled five
months after the policy was affected following the coming into
effect of the European Union Council Regulation (EU No.961,
2010 imposing sanctions on Iran. The notices of cancellation of
policies served by the co-insurers of the policies were held valid
and effective.

3

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

1.3.5 In the 1990s, North Korea up scaled plutonium enrichment in
apparent pursuit of nuclear weapon, began to engage in the
testing of weapons of mass destruction and threatened to
withdraw from the nuclear non-proliferation treaty. In response
the UN Security Council in Resolution 2094 in 2013 mandated
“Member States shall not provide public financial support for
trade with the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea including
granting of export credits, guarantees or insurance to their
national or entities involved in such trade if the support would
contribute to North Korea’s weapon development. Following
North Korea’s recalcitrance in 2016 when it announced a further
test of hydrogen bomb, the UN Security Council by Resolution
2270 prohibited member States from registering any vessel or
ensuring any vessel carry the Flag of the DPRK. This was
extended by Resolution 2321 requiring member States to prohibit
“insurance or reinsurance services to vessels owned, controlled or
operated, including through illicit means, by the DPRK”
Resolution 2397 directed member states to prohibit its nationals
or entities registered under its laws from providing insurance or
re-insurance services to vessels having business relations with the
DPRK.
1.3.6 The rationale for the use of marine insurance prohibitions for
sanctions purposes is that by limiting access to this integral
source of risk management, the countries find it more difficult to
access maritime transport or to generate trade revenue to meet
strategic national development. These marine insurance
prohibitions have had hurtful economic impact on these countries
that have shown willingness to return to negotiations on the
issues at stake.

1.4

Risk and Features of Marine Insurance

1.4.1 The associated risks of maritime adventure are very huge and
unless hedged, successful maritime activities are at risk. Here, the
subject of insurance comes to the rescue. The subject of insurance
is concerned with risks management and risks financing. Its
primary function is risk transference and distribution. By
effecting insurance, the insured/assured transfers the risk of
economic losses to the insurer who in turn redistributes the risk
through investment and reinsurance. The insured is actually
buying an invisible product called “peace of mind”. With huge
financial outlay in vessels acquisition, commodities and
manufactured goods/plants, owners and creditors contemplate,
for good reasons, some protection to mitigate possible losses in

4

CLL809

MODULE 1

the event of accident. Marine insurance provides that financial
cushioning in the event of loss or damage.

1.4.2 A distinctive feature of marine insurance is its international
dimensions. The coverage on goods shipped by sea usually
involves transport between one country and another. The
consignor/seller of the goods and the consignee/buyer are often in
different countries. The insurer of the vessel (hull) or goods
(cargo) may be in a third country having no contact with the
shipment except the provision of the contract only. For reasons of
capacity the assured, especially in developing countries may
prefer to deal with insurers in developed countries (UK, US,
Germany) with the capacity to assume the weight of the financial
risk involved. Consequently, the regulation of maritime and
marine insurance is a subject of national and international
interests. In Arash Shipping v. Groupama [2011] EWCA (Civ)
620(Eng.) the composite insurance policy taken out on Iranian
fleet of oil tankers was underwritten by a syndicate of insurance
firms in France, Cyprus, Sweden, UK, Bermuda and Republic of
Korea.
1.4.3 Furthermore, the Article VII (1) International Convention on
Civil Liability for Oil Pollution Damage 1992 provides that the
owner of a ship registered in a contracting State and carrying
more than 2,000 tons of oil as cargo shall be required to maintain
insurance to cover his liability from Oil pollution damage under
the circumstance. The import of this convention is that ship
owners in Nigeria are compelled to procure the necessary
protection and Indemnity insurance cover for their vessel that are
engaged in the carriage of oil as cargo in order to undertake the
liability that could arise from any oil spill from the vessel
operation. Also, the Bunkers Convention 2001 requires registered
owner of a ship having gross tonnage greater than 1000 to
maintain insurance to cover the liability of the registered owner
for pollution damage. These conventions are applicable in
Nigeria by virtue of part XXIII, Merchant shipping Act, 2007.
The subject of marine insurance in Nigeria has national and
international implication for the country and thus deserving of
serious engagement with.
1.5

Summary

Marine insurance fosters maritime adventure. Consequently, Nigeria and
other nations of the world take marine insurance seriously. In addition to
providing enabling environment, it is also the subject of legal regulation.
5

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

Marine insurance is a major boost to maritime activities through loss
mitigation. It sustains the maritime sector which is a major employer of
labour and contributor to a country’s gross domestic product. Marine
insurance prohibition has become a tool for preserving international
order and peace. It has also enabled Nigeria comply with her
international obligations with respect to some maritime activities.

1.6

References/Further Reading/Web Sources

Richard L. Kilpatrick, Jr “Marine Insurance Prohibitions in
Contemporary Economic Warfare” International Law Series,
Stockton Center for International Law, Volume 95,2019, 272.
Dr. Oluwole Akinyeye “Evaluating Potentials of the Legislative
Framework Impacting on the Nigerian Marine Insurance
Industry” The Maritime Newsletter, Olisa Agbakoba Legal,
https://oal.law.2018/01
Birds, J. Birds Modern Insurance Law, Sweet & Maxwell. 2004(ISBN
0-42187800-2)
Nwokoro I.A and Ndikom Obed B.C. “An Assessment of the Condition
of Marine Insurance to the Development of Insurance Markets in
Nigeria” Journal of Geography and Regional Planning, Vol.5 (8),
April,
2012.
Available
on
line
http://www.academicjournals.org/JGRP.
Prof. Marko Pavliha Overview of Maritime Insurance Law, IMO
International Maritime Law Institute.

6

CLL809

MODULE 1

UNIT 2

MEANING OF MARINE INSURANCE

UNIT STRUCTURE
2.1
Introduction
2.2
Learning Outcomes
2.3
Meaning of Marine Insurance
2.4
Definitions
2.4.1 Textual Definitions
2.4.2 Statutory Definitions
2.5
Summary
2.6
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
2.7
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction
Marine insurance is an arrangement where at an agreed price, a party
called the insurer undertakes a risk of marine adventure on behalf of
another called the insured or assured. Marine insurance is essentially
about risk management.

2.2 Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 state the nature of the obligations exchanged between the parties to a
marine insurance.

2.3

Meaning of Marine Insurance
2.3.1 Generally, an insurance contract can be described as a
contract whereby the party called the “insurer” promises in
return for a money consideration called the “premium” to
pay to the other party called the “insured” or the “assured”
a sum of money or to provide him with some
corresponding benefit upon the occurrence of one or more
specified events. It is largely driven by the principles of
contribution and the law of large numbers. It may be
defined with emphasis on its financial or legal nature.
Because insurance allows losses to be predicted in advance
of its occurring, it allows the cost to be financed and
redistributed in advance of their occurring by collecting
premium payment from the assured/insured in exchange for
promise to be indemnified in the event of a loss. In most
cases only a small percentage of the losses do occur.

7

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

2.3.2 Etymologically, ‘marine’ is derived from the Latin word ‘mare’
which literally means ‘sea’. Marine is an adjective, meaning ‘of
or pertaining to the sea’. Marine insurance is a specie of
insurance. It has been variously defined.
2.4

Definitions of Marine Insurance
2.4.1 Definition by Text Authors
According to Agomo
“Insurance is a contract where one party called the
insurer for a consideration called premium paid by
another called insured, agrees to pay money or to
provide compensation in kind to the insured or his
beneficiary on the happening of the insured event”

To R. Thomas (Cited in “Overview of Marine Insurance Law” by Prof.
Dr. Marko Pavliha)
“The Contract of Marine Insurance is a special
(insurance) contract of indemnity which protects
against physical and other losses to moveable
property and associated interests, as well as against
liabilities occurring or arising during the course of a
sea voyage”
In the words of Dr. Oluwole Akinyeye
“Marine insurance can rightly be described as the
matriarch of all insurance. It can be defined as a
contractual relationship in which an insurer agrees
to undertake the liability flowing from maritime
risks or perils that could arise from the
entrepreneurial activities of an insured ship owner
or maritime trader, upon the payment of a
consideration referred to as a premium”
2.4.2 Statutory Definition
According to Section 3, Marine Insurance Act, CAP M2, Laws of
the Federation, 2004
“A contract of marine insurance is a contract
whereby the insurer undertakes to indemnify the
assured, in a manner and to the extent thereby
agreed, against marine losses, that is to say, the
losses incidental to marine adventure1

8

CLL809

MODULE 1

This definition mirrors section 1, UK Marine Insurance Act, 1906 and
the Indian Marine Insurance Act, 1963. A more detail definition is to be
seen in the old Indian Insurance Act, 1938. Section 2 (13-A) defines
marine insurance business as
“The business of effecting contracts of insurance
upon vessels of any description, including cargoes,
freights and other interest, goods, wares,
merchandise and property whatever description
insured for any transit by land or water or both,
and whether or not including warehouse risks or
similar risks in addition or incidental to such
transit, and includes any other risk customarily
included among the risk insured against in marine
insurance policies”
As stated under the Marine Insurance Act, 2004 (MIA), it has so much
to do with losses incidental to marine adventure. Marine adventure is a
voyage where the ship or goods on board/freight are exposed to
maritime perils. Maritime perils mean the perils consequent on or
incidental to navigation on the sea. This includes the risks of fire, war,
pirates, thieves, barratry, loss or damage caused by any latent defect in
the machinery of hull, negligence of the master, officers, crew or pilot,
repairers, charterers; pollution Hazards; and collision liability. The risk
of loss may extend to financial losses, such as those resulting from loss
of freight, passage money, commission or profit as well as certain types
of liabilities incurred to third parties. These risks are subjects of marine
insurance coverage. Marine insurance in terms of scope may be ocean
marine insurance or inland marine insurance.

2.5

Summary

Marine insurance can be severally defined from the perspectives of
textbook authors, case law and legislation. Central to the various
definitions is the fact that it is a contract between the assured and the
insurer, where for a price called the premium, the insurer undertakes to
indemnify the assured against losses associated on a maritime adventure.
Marine insurance hedges against risks in maritime adventures. The risks
contemplated may relate to the ship, consignments or related risks.

9

CLL809

2.6

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

References/Further Readings/Web Sources

Robert H. Brown, Witherby Encyclopedic Dictionary of Marine
Insurance: Insurance Terms and Clauses, Dictionary of Marine,
2003, Witherby & Co. Ltd, ISBN 978-1856092227
Prudential Insurance Company v. IRC (1904)2KB 558; Lead way
Assurance Co. Ltd v. J.U.C. Ltd (2005) 5 NWLR, Pt.919,539:
Ajaokuta Steel Co. v. Corporate Insurers Ltd (2004) 16
NWLR,Pt.899,369: Sun Insurance Nig. PLC v. Umez
Engineering
Construction Company Ltd. (2015). 11 NWLR,Pt.1471, 576.
1)
C.K.Agomo (2003) Modern Nigerian Law of Insurance
(University of Lagos Press, Lagos) p.11.

10

CLL809

MODULE 1

UNIT 3

NATURE OF MARINE INSURANCE

UNIT STRUCTURE
3.1
Introduction
3.2
Learning Outcome
3.3
Nature of Marine Insurance
3.3.1 Contractual
3.3.2 Aleatory
3.3.3 Indemnity
3.4
Summary
3.5
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
3.6
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction
Marine insurance has certain peculiar features which confers on its
justiciability. These features also distinguished it from other legal
relationship.

3.2

Learning Outcome

By the end of this unit, you should be to:
 identify and differentiate marine insurance from other legal
relationships.

3.3

Nature of Marine Insurance
3.3.1 Marine Insurance is Contractual
The general principles of the law of contract apply and parties
can negotiate their terms. The immediate parties to the contract
are the insured/assured and the insurer. The parties must have
contractual capacities. The insured must have the legal capacity
to enter into the contract. The insurer must also have the legal
capacity. In Nigeria, the insurer must be an incorporated limited
liability company and duly registered by the National Insurance
Commission or a statutory corporation for the purpose.

3.3.2 Contracts of Insurance are Aleatory
The happening of the event insured against is uncertain. They are,
however, not wagering, gambling or investment contract where the
insured may contemplate a profit from the arrangement.

11

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

3.3.3 Marine Insurance is Contract of Indemnity
The basic principle of insurance is that the insured is to be indemnified
for the pecuniary loss suffered under the contract. In the words of Lord
Ellenborough in Brotherston v. Barber (1816) 5 M & S, 418, 425
“The great principle of the law of insurance is that
it is a contract for indemnity. The underwriter does
not stipulate under any circumstance, to become
the purchaser of the subject matter insured; it is
not supposed to be in his contemplation: he is to
indemnify only”
The assured is to be placed in the same position or near as possible as he
was before the happening of the event insured against. Explaining the
underlying philosophy, Brown stated:
In theory, the purpose of any form of insurance is to replace that which
has been lost. It is not intended that the assured should make a profit
from his loss. But that he should merely be in no worse position than he
was before the loss occurred…it is not practicable to expect the insurer
to replace an object which is lost, nor is it reasonable to expect him to
remove the damage thus restoring the damaged object to the whole
sound object. As a compromise, any recompense must be of a monetary
nature and this system of reimbursement is called “Indemnity”
Ideally, the insured should be compensated only to the extent of his loss.
In practice, however, this is not always the case. Thus, the policy of
insurance is not a perfect contract of indemnity. In Irving v. Manning
(1847) 1 HLC 287, a valued policy of insurance put the agreed value of
the vessel, General Kyd, at 17,000 pounds. The vessel was severely
damaged by storms and the owner deemed the ship a total loss because it
was estimated that the cost of repairs would have amounted to 10,500
pounds, while her market value, on being repaired was 9,000 pounds.
The Court held that the assured was entitled to the insured value of
17,000 pounds. According to Patteson J
“A policy of insurance is not a perfect contract of
indemnity. It must be taken with this
qualification that the parties may agree
beforehand in estimating the value of the subject
assured, by way of liquidated damages, as indeed
they may in any other contract to indemnify”.

12

CLL809

MODULE 1

In Richards v Forestal Land, Timber and Railway Co. Ltd [1941]3
All ER 62, HL, goods on the board of a German vessel were lost at the
outset of the second world war when the ship was scuttled in order to
avoid capture. On the purpose of the Insurance Act, Lord Wright stated:
The law is merely dealing with a particular branch of the law of
contracts-namely, those of marine insurance. Subject to various
imperative provisions or prohibitions and general rules of the common
law, the parties are free to make their own contract and to exclude or
vary the statutory terms. The object both of the legislature and of the
courts has been to give effect to the idea of indemnity, which is the basic
principle of insurance, and to apply it to the diverse complications of
fact and law in respect of which it has to operate. In this way, the law
merchant has solved or sought to solve the manifold problems which
have been presented by insurances of marine adventures.
While the overriding principle of insurance is that of indemnification for
losses sustained, the parties are free to contract on whatever terms they
think fit. Common law and the Act endorse the fact that the value fixed
by the policy is conclusive of the insurable value of the subject matter
insured. This allows the parties to set the insurable value at the figure
they so wish, provided that any over valuation does not offend the duty
of good faith, the rule on disclosure of material fact, fraud,
misrepresentation or the rule against wager. In practice, a contract of
insurance is by no means a complete indemnity but indemnity is always
the basis of the contract. In fact, it is around it that the other fundamental
principles of marine insurance like double insurance, the right to
contribution, return of premium, and subrogation coalesce.

3.3.4 Marine Insurance Contract is Regulated by Law
The agreement of the assured and insurer is core to marine insurance.
This is however within the context of enabling laws. The Marine
Insurance Act, 2004 (MIA) is the primary legislation on the subject of
marine insurance in Nigeria. The Insurance Act 2003 and the National
Insurance Commission Act, 2004 provide prudential and conduct of
business regulations for the entire insurance industry in Nigeria, of
which marine insurance is subset. Although there is absence of
international law on marine insurance, several countries have enacted
domestic legislation on the subject. In some countries, the regulation
exists primarily in the form of specific enactment on marine insurance or
as a section contained in a larger insurance enactment. In some civil law
countries, the law exists as a chapter in the national commercial or
maritime code. Several countries have substantially adopted the UK
Marine Act 1906, complemented by the general law of contract. In these
jurisdictions, their exact content may vary; certain fundamentals of
marine insurance constitute their subjects of coverage. These include
13

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

insurable interest, disclosures and representations, form and content of
policy, double insurance, premium, nature of policies, types of risks,
assignment of policy, claims etc. Considering the contractual nature of
marine insurance, the law gives large discretion to the parties in drawing
up the terms and conditions of their contract. This allows industry
practice to guide the parties in the formation of marine insurance.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1
What is peculiar about marine insurance and why should a developing Country
like Nigeria attach importance to the subject of marine insurance?

3.4 Summary
Marine insurance is contractual; the rules of contract apply. The assured
and insured must have requisite legal capacities to enter into the
contract. The obligation is essentially hinged on the happening of
uncertain event but marine insurance is not gambling, wagering or
investment contract. On the happening of the risk(s) insured against, the
assured can only be indemnified to the extent stipulated by law. The
Marine Insurance Act, Cap M2, 2004 regulate the subject of marine
insurance in Nigeria. Marine insurance is a legal relationship between
the assured and the insurer. This relationship has some distinct features.
It is based on the happening of uncertain event(s) such that the assured
may be restored to the position he was before the happening of the event
in what is called indemnity.

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Marine Insurance Act, 1906 UK; The Marine Insurance Act, 1963 India.
Chapter 11, Marine Insurance in the Insurance Act,1914, Philippines.
Title VIII, Commercial Code, Venezuela.
Insurance Act, 1977, Iran.
Noussia, K. (2007) The Principle of Indemnity in Marine Insurance
Contract: a comparative approach
R.H.Brown, Marine Insurance-The Principles (London: Witherby and
Co.Ltd,1970) p.19.
14

CLL809

MODULE 1

3.6 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise 1
i. Nigeria is a coastal country and a major player in global maritime industry.
Marine insurance enhances this industry and thus a major contributor to her
GDP.
ii. Marine Insurance aids international trade. Nigeria’s major export earning is from
crude oil sales transported across the sea to trading partners.
iii. Marine insurance impacts on balance of trade.
iv. Marine insurance industry is a major employer of labour.

v. Marine insurance industry facilitates international relations

15

CLL809

MODULE 2

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF THE
LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE

UNIT 1 PRE –INDEPENDENCE ERA
UNIT STRUCTURE
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6

Introduction
Learning Outcome
Pre-Independence Era
Summary
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction
Law of Marine Insurance in Nigeria has ancient origin. By facts of
history the UK Marine Insurance Act, 1906 has influence the
development of the law on the subject in so many other jurisdictions. By
the same token the British insurance market as largely represented by
the Lloyds of London has had great impact in the practice and
dominance of marine insurance globally. The history of marine
insurance is inextricably tied to activities of sea farers and maritime
adventurers. At various times the marine insurance industry has been
subject to some form of regulation. The UK Marine Insurance Act, 1906
has become the watershed in the history of the law of marine insurance.
1.2 Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 discuss the source of the Marine Insurance Act, 2004.
1.3 Pre-Independence Era
1.3.1 Marine insurance is the oldest form of welfare indemnity
scheme, and it is known to have been practiced for over 800
years. According to Dr. Pomintr Sooksripaisarnkit “Marine
insurance is one of the most primitive forms of any insurance
arrangements on earth”. There are several claims to the origin
of marine insurance. The practice has been linked to the
practice of Bottomry in the ancient records of Babylonians
and the Code of Hammurabi where manufacturers of goods
advanced their materials to traders who gave them receipts
for the materials and a rate of interest was agreed upon. If the
trader was robbed during the journey, he would be freed from
the debt but if he came back, he would pay both the value of
the materials and the interest. The early maritime merchants
16

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

in Greece, the Carthaginians, Phoenicians, Romans and the
Lombards secured vessels and goods carried on board of their
vessels. There is evidence that around the 7th Century BC,
there was a Phoenician maritime law covering general
average and marine insurance. Traces of marine voyage
insurance were found in the Talmuds of Jerusalem and
Babylon. A credible account suggests that the Jews in
Lombardy around the 12th Century had a scheme for the
protection of their properties in France. In 1601 “An Act
concerning Matters of Assurances Amongst Merchants” was
the first statute on marine insurance in UK and the Act dared
to establish a court of insurance for marine insurance
disputes.
The growth in ocean trade provided the needed impetus for
marine insurance. In the pre-colonial times very wealthy
merchants alone or in consortium with others undertook
continental expeditions for military and trade purposes.
1.3.2 It was quite common for merchants to exercise political power in
trust for their home government over the territories they were
granted monopolies by charter. A familiar example was the East
India Company which in its hey days was said to have conquered
a sub-continent, ruled over 250 million people, raised and
supported the largest standing army in the world, deployed 43
war ships and employed its own bishops. Another example was
the Royal Niger Company which administered a large part of
today’s Nigeria.
1.3.3 British merchant fleets dominated world tonnage at the time. The
UK’s prominence in general commerce and finance gradually
made London the international market centre for marine
insurance. For this reason, a distinctive feature of marine
insurance is the profound impact the British market have had on
the conduct of marine insurance internationally. The UK Marine
Insurance Act, 1906 is the main law from which so many
jurisdictions have sourced their laws on this subject.
1.3.4 Legal and documentary aspects of marine insurance were the
subject of consideration by the United Nations Commission on
Trade and Development (UNCTAD) at its very first session of its
conference in Geneva 1964. It was recommended that the
competent international organisations should examine the
question of the adoption of uniform clauses for marine, land and
air transport insurance. At the second UNCTAD Conference in
New Delhi in 1968, developing countries expressed concerns of
17

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

neglect in the body of shipping laws at the time and thus the need
for review. Marine insurance was an area contemplated for
drafting appropriate conventions or revising existing legislation.
Consequently, the UNCTAD Committee on Shipping set up a
Working Group on International Shipping Legislation in 1969 to
consider the simplification and unification of clauses in marine
Insurance policies. The Working group prepared two separate
reports; one on Marine cargo Insurance presented in 1975. The
report contained descriptive analysis of marine cargo insurance,
institutional aspects, role in world trade, analysis of the
commercial and economic problems experienced by marine cargo
insurance business in developing countries and recommendations
for improvements to improve the balance of payment positions of
the economies of developing countries. The second report
considered hull and cargo insurance. It analysed marine insurance
contractual relationship, the legislation, policy, conditions and
practices that affects the process of obtaining insurance, system
of rating, rights and duties of parties, an analysis of the effects of
the absence of international legislation, particularly in developing
countries and considers the possibility of developing an
international legal base for marine insurance contract. The
attempt by the UNCTAD Model Clauses on Marine Hull and
Cargo Insurance 1984 to water down the monopoly of the
London market and its Institute Clauses have not been effective
and marine insurance stakeholders still prefer the Lloyd’s S.G
Form (developed from the practice of Lloyds of London) and the
Institute Clauses (developed from the practice of the Institute of
London Underwriters).
1.3.5 Traditionally the British insurance market has been considered to
be the main marine insurance market in the world. The market
consists of private entitles carrying on business in some major
cities in UK especially in London and Liverpool. Prominently is
the Lloyds of London. This is an association of insurers with
unlimited personal liability for the risks underwritten. These
insurers are grouped into syndicates with each under an
underwriting agency who is responsible for appointing a
specialist underwriter to accept risks on behalf of the other
members. All risks are brought to the Lloyds syndicate through
authorised intermediaries called Lloyds brokers. The London
market also comprised of insurance corporations most of whom
are members of the Institute of London Underwriters (ILU)
formed in 1884 which furthers the interest of members in matters
of marine insurance.

18

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

1.3.6 The British market dominated for quite a while in international
maritime and marine insurance and was later joined by the United
States and Netherlands, France, Japan, Norway and Russia. This
growth has also witnessed internationalisation of risk
management. National markets in marine insurance may share
risk coverage with the markets in other jurisdictions especially
between developing and developed economies. This has given
birth to international reinsurance companies carrying on
wholesale insurance business and dealing with national market
that undertake retail insurance businesses. Consequently, marine
insurance now involves increasingly complex contractual
relationships of assureds, assurers, co-insurers and reinsurers
spread across numerous national boundaries raising issues of
contract enforcement and conflict of laws.
1.3.7 Currently there are no uniform international conditions for
marine insurance; instead, varied policy forms produced by
numerous national marine insurance markets are used. Of the
variety, the policy form produced by the London Insurance
market for hull and cargo insurance has gained some notoriety.
The reason for this is the historical economic predominance of
the British market for insurance placement on both direct and
reinsurance basis particularly for developing countries and the
high level of expertise existing on the subject and established
precedent from practice over the years.

1.4 Summary
There is no gainsaying the fact that colonialism indeed gave the British a
head starts in maritime adventure complemented by marine insurance
business. Consequently, the law and practice of marine insurance have
greatly been impacted upon by the British precedent. Marine Insurance is
the oldest form of insurance business. As early as the 7th century,
maritime adventures enjoyed some form of marine insurance protections.
The Marine insurance Act, 1906 have become the main source of
legislation on the subject from where other jurisdictions have drawn their
laws on the subject. While the history of the law of marine insurance can
be traced to different times and practices of different countries, the effect
of the UK Marine Insurance Act, 1906 and the business of the Lloyd’s
market underwriters are profound.

19

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
Dr. Pomintr Sooksripaisarnkit, Marine Insurance, Maritime Law and
Practice in Hong Kong, (Dec.2015) Sweet and Maxwell, Asia,
Chapter 8
Nicholas Berketis The history of Marine Insurance-Its Origin Athen
University of Economics & Business
https://eclass.aueb.gr>file.php
Professor Dr. Marko Pavliha(2010) “Overview of Marine Insurance
Law”
IMO
International
Maritime
Law
Institute
(marko.pavliha@fpp.edu)
The UK Marine Insurance Act,1906 came into force on 1st January,
1907, had 96 sections and First Schedule- which is the Form of
Policy: Lloyds S.G. policy and Rules for Construction of policy)
Second Schedule (Enactments Repealed)
The United Nations Commission on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD) was established on December 30, 1965 by a United
Nations General Assembly Resolution as a permanent organ of
the General Assembly to promote international trade especially in
emerging nations.
See the Norwegian Marine Insurance Plan of 1964 and the Norwegian
Insurance Plan for the Carriage of goods of 1967.
http://www.lloydsoflondon.com
The drafting of clauses for hull and cargo is carried out through the
Institute of London Underwriters (ILU) Technical & Clauses
Committee. Its 1982 Clauses significantly make clear and
accurate some fundamental marine clauses possibly amending the
old SG Form Clauses. The 1982 Clauses have further been
reviewed by the Joint Cargo Committee of members of the
International Underwriting Association and the Lloyds Market in
2009.See www.imalloyds.com: www.rhlg.com

20

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

UNIT 2

POST–INDEPENDENCE ERA

UNIT STRUCTURE
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.6

Introduction
Learning Outcomes
Post-Independence Era
Summary
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction
Shortly after independence, Nigeria enacted a Marine Insurance Act to
regulate insurance business in Nigeria. This has been followed by the
establishment of an institutional body charged with regulating the
insurance sector.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 state the law regulating marine insurance in Nigeria
 discuss the conduct of business regulations of the insurance industry
in Nigeria.

2.3 Post-Independence Era
2.3.1 Nigeria is a coastal nation with very big waters to attract
maritime activities. Slave trade and the exportation of raw
materials were largely carried out through marine
expeditions. Marine Insurance debuted in Nigeria around
the early 20th century by the British colonialists to cater for
risks that accompanied commercial activities of the
European adventurers at the time. These persons effected
their insurance policies with established insurers in the
London insurance market. As time went on some British
insurers appointed Nigerian representatives in the country as
agents. This later gave way to full branch offices in Nigeria
of parent companies in Britain. The first insurance company
to open a full branch office in Nigeria was the Royal
Exchange Assurance Company in 1921. Others companies
followed subsequently. In 1969 and 1977 the National
Insurance Corporation of Nigeria (NICON) and the Nigeria
Reinsurance Corporation were established respectively. The
first indigenous law on the subject was the Marine
Insurance Act, 1961. This was followed by the Insurance
Decree 1976 and the Insurance Decree 1991. In 1997, the
21

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

Insurance Decree No.1 and National Insurance Commission
Decree No. 2 were promulgated and later became known as
Insurance Act, 1997 and the National Insurance
Commission Act,1997.
2.3.2 The Insurance Act, No.1, 1997 provided body of regulation for
the entire insurance industry and the National Insurance
Commission Act, No.2. 1997 established the National Insurance
Commission as the apex regulatory body for insurance in Nigeria.
These two enactments were subsequently integrated into the
Laws of the Federation, 2004 as Insurance Act, Cap I18 and the
National Insurance Commission Act, Cap N53. Instructively,
section 67(1) of the Insurance Act compelled domestic insurance
of goods to be imported into Nigeria. This was calculated to
boost the domestic marine insurance market. The Insurance Act,
1997 which was integrated into the laws of the Federation, 2004
was repealed and replaced by the Insurance Act, 2003 which is
the current law on the subject of insurance in Nigeria.
2.3.3 The Insurance Act 2003 divides insurance businesses in Nigeria
into two main classes: life Insurance business and general
insurance business. Specifically, marine and aviation insurance
business is a category of general insurance business. Section
67(1) of the repealed Insurance Act, 1997 was retained under the
Insurance Act, 2003. The section provides in full:
(1)
Subject to subsection 4 of this section, an insurance in
respect of goods to be imported into Nigeria shall be made
with an insurer registered under this Act.
(2)
Accordingly, the provisions of any law, contract or
instrument shall be construed with such modifications,
amendments and omissions, as would bring them into
conformity with the general intendment of this section.
(3)
Without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing, every
letter of credit or such similar document issued by any bank
or other financial institution in Nigeria in respect of such
goods shall be on a carriage and freight basis only.
(4)
An importer, broker or agent who effects any insurance
otherwise than in compliance with the provisions of this
section commits an offence and is liable on conviction to a
fine of N500,000 Naira.
This provision insists on domestic insurance of all goods
imported into the country. For the bulk of cargo imported through
ocean liners, such consignments must be insured with insurance
firms registered under the Insurance Act, 2003. Insurance is an
item on the Exclusive Legislative List of the Constitution of the
Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999 as amended. Specifically, items
22

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

33 and 36 are insurance and maritime shipping and navigation.
Only the national Assembly can legislate on these matters.
2.3.4 The legal regimes governing marine insurance are greatly
impacted upon by the agreement of the parties in the marine
insurance contract. In several countries applicable statutory rules
are capable of being displaced by the parties’ contractual terms.
In such cases, the national legislation is overridden on regular
basis, either in large part or in its entirety, by provisions in the
marine insurance contracts: the UK marine Insurance Act, 1906
is an example. The Nigerian Marine Insurance Act, 2004 allows
the parties a lot of discretion in the formation of marine insurance
contract. Under French law however the rules on Insurable
interest, representation and disclosure, fraud in the making of a
contract, double insurance, negligence of the assured, disputes as
to whether loss was caused by maritime or war perils,
consequence of failure to pay premium are not alterable by
contracts.

2.4

Summary

The Marine Insurance Act, 1961 was the first law on the subject after
independence. This was subsequently replaced by the Marine Insurance
Act, 2004 which is the current law on marine insurance in Nigeria. The
Marine Insurance Act, 2004 is the current law on marine insurance in
Nigeria. The Insurance Act, 2003 and the National Insurance
Commission Act, 2004 provide prudential and conduct of business
regulation over the entire insurance industry in Nigeria.

2.5

References/Further Readings/Web Sources

Nicholas Berketis The history of Marine Insurance-Its Origin Athen
University of Economics & Business
https://eclass.aueb.gr>file.php
Professor Dr. Marko Pavliha (2010) “Overview of Marine Insurance
Law” IMO International Maritime Law Institute
(marko.pavliha@fpp.edu)
Nwokoro I.A and Ndikom Obed B.C. “An Assessment of the Condition
of Marine Insurance to the Development of Insurance Markets in
Nigeria” Journal of Geography and Regional Planning, Vol.5 (8),
April,
2012.
Available
on
line
http://www.academicjournals.org/JGRP.
See Dr Oluwole Akinyeye “Evaluating Potentials of the Legislative
Framework Impacting On the Nigerian Marine Insurance
23

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

Industry” February 2018, Maritime Newsletter, OAL
Https://oal.law
Item 33, Exclusive Legislative List, Part 1,Second Schedule,
Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,1999 (as
amended)

24

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

UNIT 3

INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR THE
REGULATION OF MARINE INSURANCE IN
NIGERIA

UNIT STRUCTURE
3.1
3.2
3.3

3.4
3.5
3.6

Introduction
Learning Outcomes
Institutional Framework for the Regulation of Marine Insurance
in Nigeria
3.3.1 Insurance Act 2003
3.3.2 National Insurance Commission (NAICOM)
3.3.3 Conduct of Insurance Business in Nigeria
3.3.4 Right to Engage in Insurance Business
3.3.5 The Nigeria Reinsurance Corporation Act 2004
3.3.6 National Insurance Corporation of Nigeria
Summary
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1

Introduction

The National Insurance Commission (NAICOM) has been charged with
regulating the entire insurance industry including the marine insurance
subsector. The NAICOM as gate keeper regulates the industry using
various regulatory tools.

3.2

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 describe how the marine insurance subsector of the economy is
supervised
 discuss the limits of the powers of NAICOM over insurers and
intermediaries are understood and appreciated.

3.3 Institutional Framework for the Regulation of Marine
Insurance in Nigeria
3.3.1 Insurance Act 2003
The Insurance Act, 2003 provides the body of regulation
for the insurance industry in Nigeria. The National
Insurance Commission provides the institutional
regulation. Section 1, National Insurance Commission Act,
2004 establishes the NAICOM. It is a body corporate with
perpetual succession and a common seal. The Commission
25

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

has a governing board which is responsible for managing
and superintending the affairs of the commission. The
governing body consists of a part time chairman and
representatives of the Federal Ministry of Finance and he
Central Bank of Nigeria not below the rank of Director. A
representative of the Chartered institute of Insurance and
the Federal ministry of Commerce and Tourism are also on
the board. Three part time members on the board shall
represent the interest of the public. The commissioner of
Insurance and two Deputy Commissioners of the
Commission are also members of the governing board. All
the members except the ex-officio members are appointed
by the President for an initial renewable term of 4 years.
3.3.2 National Insurance Commission (NAICOM)
The principal object of the Commission shall be to ensure the
effective administration, supervision, regulation and control of
insurance business in Nigeria. The Commission shall have the
following functions:
(a) Establish standards for the conduct of insurance business in
Nigeria:
(b) Approve rates of insurance premiums to be paid in respect of all
classes of insurance business:
(c) Approve rates of commissions to be paid in respect of all classes
of insurance business in Nigeria:
(d) Ensure adequate protection of strategic government assets and
other properties:
(e) Regulate transactions between insurers and reinsurers in Nigeria
and those outside Nigeria:
(f) Act as adviser to the Federal Government on all related
insurance matters:
(g) Approve standards, conditions and warranties applicable to all
classes of insurance contracts:
(h) Protect insurance policy holders and beneficiaries and third
parties to insurance contracts:
(i) Publish for sale and distribution to the public, annual reports and
statistics on the insurance industry:
(j) Liaise with and advise Federal Ministries, Extra Ministerial
Departments, Statutory bodies and other Government agencies
on all matters relating to insurance contained in any technical
agreement to which Nigeria is a signatory;
(k) Contribute to the educational programmers of the Chartered
insurance Institute of Nigeria and he West African Insurance
Institute; and
(l) Carry out such other activities connected or incidental to its
functions under the Act.
26

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

3.3.3 Conduct of Insurance Business in Nigeria
For the conduct of any business of insurance in Nigeria, section 3,
Insurance Act, 2003 stipulates that no person shall commence or carry
on any class of insurance business in Nigeria except: a company duly
incorporated as a limited liability company under the Companies and
Allied Matters Act,1990; or a body duly established by or pursuant to
any other enactment to transact the business of insurance or reinsurance
[ i.e. National Insurance Corporation of Nigeria or Nigeria Reinsurance
Corporation]. This effectively shut the door against sole proprietor or
partnership carrying on the business of marine insurance or any
insurance business in Nigeria. Is this all that is required to operate as an
insurance company in Nigeria? No, there are other important
requirements.
By section 4(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, no insurer
shall commence insurance business in Niger
unless the insurer is registered by the Commission
under this Act
(2) The commission shall not grant approval if it is
satisfied that it is not in the public interest or the
interest of policy holders or persons who may
become policyholders for it to be granted.
According to section 5
(1)
An application for registration as an insurer shall
made to the Commission in the prescribed form
and be accompanied by a business plan and such
other documents or information as the
Commission may from time to time direct or
require.
(2)
For the purpose of this Act, life insurance and
general insurance business shall be subject to
separate application and registration.
Section 6
(1)
The Commission shall before registering an
insurer be satisfied that(a)
the class or category of insurance business shall
be conducted in accordance with sound
insurance principles;
(b)
the applicant being one of the persons referred to
under section 3 of this Act is duly established
under the applicable law and has a paid-up share
capital and statutory deposit for the relevant
class of insurance business;
27

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

(c) the arrangements relating to reinsurance
treaties in respect of the class or category of
insurance business to be transacted are
adequate and valid;
(d) the proposal forms, terms and conditions of
policies are in order and acceptable;
(e) There shall be competent and professionally
qualified persons as may be determined
from time to time by the Commission to
manage the company.

3.3.4 Right to Engage in Insurance Business
Under Part VII, Insurance Act, 2003, no person can carry on
business as insurance agent, brokers and loss adjusters unless
such person has been duly registered with the National Insurance
Commission. Prudential and conduct of business guidelines for
these professionals are set by the NAICOM.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2
Where can the law of marine insurance in Nigeria be found?

3.3.5 Nigerian Reinsurance Corporation Act Cap N131 LFN
2004
The law establishes the Nigerian Reinsurance Corporation to undertake
the business of reinsurance within and outside Nigeria. The Corporation
has corporate personality and is empowered to carry on reinsurance of
any class of insurance business and to reinsure against loss of any kind
arising from any risk or contingency in respect of any matter
whatsoever.
According to section 7(1) registered insurer shall in respect of every
insurance policy issued or renewed by it reinsure with the corporation an
amount equal to twenty percent of the sum insured in the policy and the
registered insurer shall forthwith pay over to the corporation an amount
equal to twenty percent of the premium received by the registered
insurer on the issue or renewal of the policy. In respect of reinsurance
business above the twenty percent legal cession, the corporation shall
have the right of first refusal of any reinsurance business from Nigeria
before such business is placed in the international market. Where the
corporation exercises the right of first refusal, it shall issue a certificate
to this effect to the insurer before such reinsurance is placed in the
international market. This law has effect on domesticating reinsurance

28

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

business in Nigeria by increasing the risk retention capacity of the
country’s insurance industry.

3.3.6 The National Insurance Corporation of Nigeria Act, Cap
N54 LFN 2004
This legislation establishes the National Insurance Corporation of
Nigeria (NICON) as a body corporate. By section 4 of the Act, the
Corporation shall have power within or outside Nigeria to carry on any
class of insurance and to insure and reinsure against loss of any kind
arising from any risk or contingency and in respect of any matter
whatsoever. The corporation is empowered to insure any property of the
Government of the Federation or of the Government of any state in the
Federation or of any statutory corporation; to insure any property in
which any of the said governments has interest; to accept on reinsurance
any part of risks undertaken by any other person and to retrocede any
part of such risks; to act as insurance agent or insurance broker in
relation to any insurance, and in particular in relation to the insurance of
any property in which Government of the Federation or of the
Government of any state in the Federation or of any statutory
corporation has interest.
These bodies no doubt can undertake marine insurance or
reinsurance businesses and are important institutions to have
recourse to on a serious discussion on the subject of marine
insurance in Nigeria.

3.4 Summary
Institutional bodies are necessary to provide the enabling environment
and supervise the enforcement of standards in the entire insurance
industry. Aside from regulation, some statutory bodies are empowered
to undertake insurance businesses to deepen and create liquidity in the
market. The NAICOM is the apex regulatory body of insurance business
in Nigeria. It has been charged with providing prudential regulation and
conduct of business regulation for the insurance business in Nigeria.
Thus, no person can carry out the business of marine insurance or as a
marine insurance intermediary without registration by the NAICOM.
Nigerian Reinsurance Corporation and the NICON can also carry out
marine insurance business.

3.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
Chibuike U. Uche & B. E. Chikeleze “Reinsurance in Nigeria: The Issue
of Compulsory
Legal Cession” The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance, Vol. 26,
No.3 (July2001) 490-504
29

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

3.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise 2
a) By reason of historic fact, the Marine Insurance Act, 1906.
b) The Constitution of the Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999
(as amended)
c) The Marine Insurance Act, LFN,CAP M2, 2004.

30

CLL809

MODULE 3

MODULE 3
UNIT 1

CLASSIFICATION OF MARINE
INSURANCE

MUTUAL INSURANCE AND COMMERCIAL
INSURANCE

UNIT STRUCTURE
1.1
1.2
1.3

1.4
1.5
1.6

Introduction
Learning Outcomes
Mutual Insurance and Commercial Insurance
1.3.1 Mutual Insurance
1.3.2 Commercial Insurance
Capital Requirements
Summary
References/Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1

Introduction

There are several marine insurance companies undertaking a variety of
insurance businesses tailored to meet the needs of their clients and the
market. This provides the client with flexibility in their choices. Marine
insurance business can be undertaken for profit or non-profit motives.
It may be organised on collaborative basis as well very often defined by
the size of risk in view.

1.2

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 discuss how marine insurance businesses are organised
 state the motive for setting out mutual or commercial insurance.

1.3

Mutual Insurance and Commercial Insurance

Broadly speaking, the business of marine insurance can be divided into
mutual Insurance and commercial insurance.

1.3.1 Mutual Insurance
According to section 86 (1) of the Act “Where two or more persons
mutually agree to insure each other against marine losses, there is said
to be mutual insurance” In mutual marine insurance a group of ship
owners agree in advance to contribute to offset each other’s losses. If
and when a member sustains a loss, the others contribute ratably to
mitigate the impact of the loss (hull &Liability) on the member; no
profit is intended by this transaction. Mutual associations offering
31

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

insurances for these liabilities are called protection and indemnity (P &
I) Clubs. This mutual scheme came into prominence after the 1835 case
of De vaux v. Salvador 111 ER 85 (KB 1836). Since marine risks are
indeterminate, historically, it was more difficult to find insurers willing
to underwrite all specie of risks under one policy. As for collision risk,
underwriters at Lloyds were only willing to insure three-fourths of the
risk, requiring the ship owner to cover the remaining one-fourths. This
contributed to the development of ship owner organisations known as
protection and indemnity clubs (P&I) where members annually
contribute a call to a risk pool. Club members can then make
withdrawals from the pool to cover liabilities in accordance with the
P&I club rules.

1.3.2 Commercial Insurance
The commercial marine insurers accept premium to provide risk
coverage and have profit motive. Here, underwriters pool the premium
received from the insured to pay the few claims and expenses, build
reserve funds against future expenses and secure a small margin for
profit. The commercial marine insurance market may be dominated by
private companies or a combination of public and private sectors and by
government agencies in the case of the socialist State. The Lloyds of
London is composed of private companies grouped together in various
underwriting syndicates. In view of the international contractual
relationships undertaken by national insurers, some national insurance
markets are members of the International Union of Marine Insurance
which serves as an annual international forum for the exchange of ideas
and sharing of experiences.

1.4

Capital Requirements

1.4.1 Maritime business is capital intensive and considering the huge
financial exposure risk, the burden of bearing the risk may be
shared. Marine insurance be undertaken under co-insurance or
Reinsurance arrangements. An insurance company may spread
their potential liabilities in relatively small amount in order to
profit from the probability that only a limited percentage of the
risks would occur. Different insurers may provide risk covers on
different parts under a “co-insurance” arrangement. The
insurance is in effect by a number of insurers based on the
principle of joint and several liability. Although each insurer
contracts individually on his own part for a portion of the total
risk, he does so on the same contractual terms and conditions as
the first insurer called the lead insurer.

32

CLL809

MODULE 3

1.4.2 On the other hand, the insurer may accept the entirety of the risk
and then approach another underwriter to accept the entire or
portion of the risk which the original insurer does not want to
bear or want ceded. This is called reinsurance. It is the insuring of
a risk or part of it by the principal insurer with another insurer.
Reinsurance contract undertaken on case-by-case basis is called
“Facultative Reinsurance”. A reinsurance that is general in nature
to cover all or a designated category of subsequent reinsurances
is called Treaty Reinsurance.

1.5 Summary
Commercial reason and the size of risks may inform the various
classification and choice of insurance business. This classification has to
do with conduct of business by the insurer. There are several
classifications of marine insurance, namely mutual, commercial, coinsurance or Reinsurance business.
1.6

References/Further Reading/Web Sources

Howard Benneth, The Law of Marine Insurance. (2nd ed.). Oxford:
University Press, 2006.
De Vaux v. Salvador 111 ER 85 (KB 1836): Bank of Nova Scotia v
Mutual War Risks Association (Bermuda) Ltd [1991] 2 WLR
1279.

33

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

UNIT 2

KINDS OF MARINE POLICIES

UNIT STRUCTURE
2.1
2.2
2.3

2.4
2.5
2.6

2.1

Introduction
Learning Outcomes
Kinds of Marine Insurance
2.3.1 Voyage Policy and Time Policy
2.3.2 Valued Policy and Unvalued Policy
2.3.3 Floating and Open Cover Policy
Summary
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 3

Introduction

Marine insurance policies differ based on the different subject matters or
purpose of the contract. This classification to some extent bears on
measure of indemnity.

2.2

Learning Outcome

By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 list the various covers the insured can provide to the assured in
marine insurance
 describe to a large extent the size of the premium payable by the
assured and the scope of liability of the insured to the assured in the
event of the happening of the peril insured against.

2.3

Kinds of Marine Insurance

2.3.1 Voyage Policy and Time Policy
(Section 27, M.I.A.) A voyage policy relates to one particular
voyage. It is common for covering cargo in international trade
transactions. A time policy on the other hand relates to the subject
matter being covered for a specified time period. A specific date for
the commencement and termination of the risk must be stated in the
policy. It is generally understood that a day starts from 00;00 and
ends at 23:59:59. This is suitable for haulage and machinery cover.
2.3.2 Valued Policy and Unvalued Policy
(Sections 29 & 30, M.I.A) A valued policy is one where the agreed
valued of the subject matter is specified and in the absence of fraud,
conclusive of the insurable value of the subject matter as between the
34

CLL809

MODULE 3

insurer and the insured. This policy is very common in marine insurance
globally. The agreed valued does not necessarily reflect the real value of
the goods in question. It could include for example an element of
anticipated profit which however must be disclosed.
In the case of unvalued policy, the value of the subject matter
is not specified in the policy but left to be computed in
accordance with the insurable value which is, the prime cost
of the property insured, plus the expenses of and incidental to
shipping and the charge of insurance upon the whole.
2.3.3 Floating and Open Cover Policy
Floating and open cover policies are used by merchants who ship on
regular basis. A floating policy is intended to cover a number of
consignments setting out the general conditions of the insurance but no
particulars of the goods to be covered. The particulars are provided by
the insured to the insurer by way of a declaration. The declarations then
form an endorsement on the policy. The floating policy will cover
consignments up to an aggregate value. As each consignment is
declared, the cover is incrementally reduced. The insured is under a
statutory obligation to honestly declare the value. It allows the insured to
insure an unascertained cargo on an unascertained vessel. According to
section 31, M.I.A. “A floating policy is a policy which describes the
insurance in general terms, and leaves the name of the ship or ships and
other particulars to be defined by subsequent declaration”
An Open cover is similar except that the insurer does not
issue a policy; he merely undertakes to issue a policy. What
is provided instead is a certificate. An open cover may be
time specific or perpetual subject to termination by either
party by giving of notice.
SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3
What informs the various classification of marine insurance business?

2.4 Summary
The subject matter of the insurance may determine the kind of insurance
policy to be initiated. The insurance policy may be voyage policy, time
policy, valued policy, unvalued policy, floating or open policy. These
policies may attach to hull or cargo.
35

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Irving v. Manning (1847)1 HL Cas 287
Mathie v. The Argonaut Marine Insurance Co. (1925) 21 Ll.l.Rep.145.
Berger & Light Diffusers Property Ltd v. Pullock (1973)2 Lloyds Rep
442

36

CLL809

MODULE 3

2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise 3

a) Member society providing protection for members in the event of
a loss or damage in their business for instance protection and
indemnity Clubs through Mutual Insurance Business
b) Insurance business for profit by charging and collecting premiums
Commercial insurance Business (alone/co insurance)
c) Insurance companies ensuring the risk undertaken by them
through Reinsurance Business

37

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

MODULE 4 - GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF MARINE
INSURANCE
UNIT 1

GOOD FAITH (UBERRIMAE FIDEI)

UNIT STRUCTURE
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 The Principle of Good Faith – Uberrimae Fidei
1.3.1 Common Law Position on the Principle
1.3.2 Statutory Position on the Principle
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction
Some fundamental principles underlie marine insurance. In addition to
giving the subject its unique feature, these principles distinguish marine
insurance from other relationships. The presence or otherwise of these
principles determine the justiciability of a transaction as marine
insurance. Marine Insurance is a fiduciary contract. It is a relationship
of confidentiality, and the insured is under a duty to disclose material
facts about the risk he desires another to assume on his behalf.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:

explain why the breach of the duty of disclosure can avoid the
contract of marine insurance

state that the fact of information asymmetry compels the parties
to be of good faith in dealings with each other hence the
characterisation of marine insurance as a fiduciary relationship.

1.3 Principle of Good Faith (Uberrimae Fidei)
1.3.1 Common Law Position on the Principle
1)

38

Contracts of insurance are fiduciary contracts of utmost
good faith. The utmost good faith is required from both the
insurer and the assured. This overriding principle requires
that the parties to marine insurance must be honest to
themselves. Good faith forbids either party concealing
crucial information at his disposal on a particular subject to
induce the other into a bargain on the same subject by the
other from his ignorance of the fact and his believing the

CLL809

MODULE 4

contrary. The onus of showing lack of good faith is on the
party alleging it. The reason for this doctrine is to prevent
overreaching, taking undue advantage owing to information
asymmetry or even fraud.
2)

3)

Uberrimae fidei is a fundamental principle of
insurance law generally and finds expression in the
requirement for disclosure. The duty to disclose
means the assured must disclose all material
circumstance within his knowledge which include
those he knows and those he ought to know by the
exercise of due diligence. A circumstance is material
if it was one which would influence the judgment of
a prudent insurer in fixing the premium or
determining whether he would take the risk. It is not
necessary to show that the disclosure would have had
a decisive or conclusive influence. The underwriter
must also show that he was in fact induced to enter
the contract on the relevant terms.
The common law doctrine of good faith in insurance
contract originated in the 18th Century. Lord
Mansfield is credited with first articulating this
concept in the case of Carter v. Boehm (1766) 3
Burr 1905 where a Governor had taken out an
insurance policy against the loss of Fort Malbourugh
on the island of Sumatra but did not disclose the
extent of its vulnerability to aggression or attack.
According to his lordship
“The reason for the rule which obliges parties to
disclose is to prevent fraud, and to encourage
good faith. It is adapted to such facts as vary the
nature of the contract; which one privately
knows, and the other is ignorant of, and has no
reason to suspect”

4)

A failure to disclose a material fact renders the policy
avoidable at the instance of the insurer. The policy is
liable to be avoided whether the non- disclosure is
due to fraud, carelessness, mistake, error of
judgment, etc. The insurer is at liberty, after
becoming aware of the truth, waive the nondisclosure and affirm the policy. Fair and square, the
obligation to disclose is primarily at the domain of
the insured. In the Container Transport
39

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

International v Oceanus Mutual Underwriting
Association [1984] 1 Lloyds Rep 476 Kerr J stated:
The principle is that if a certain fact is material
… so that a failure to draw the underwriter’s
attention to it distorts the fairness of the brokers
presentation of the risk, then it is not sufficient
that this fact could have been abstracted by the
underwriter from material to which he had access
or which was cursorily shown to him. On the
other hand, if the disclosed facts give a fair
presentation of the risk, then the underwriter
must inquire if he wishes to have more
information.
5)

This decision was thought to have inclined too
heavily in favour of the insurer who would be at
liberty to avoid any policy with relative ease for
non-disclosure of what he considers material fact.
To strike some balance it was considered fair to
establish a connection between the risk and the
information thought to be material. Justice Mustill
in the case of Pan Atlantic Insurance Company
Limited v Pinetop Insurance Company [1994] 2
Lloyds Rep 427,453 stated:
I have concluded that it is an answer to a defence
of misrepresentation and non-disclosure that the
act or omission complained of had no practical
effect on the decision of the actual underwriter.
As a matter of common sense however even
where the underwriter is shown to have been
careless in other respects the assured has an
uphill task in persuading the court that the
withholding or misstatement of circumstances
satisfying the test of materiality has made no
difference. There is ample material both in the
general law and in the specialists’ works on
insurance to suggest that there is a presumption
in favour of a causative effect.
6)

40

The right to rescind enables the innocent party to
rescind the contract ab initio thereby totally
nullifying the contract and requiring everything
done under the contract to be undone, including any
adjustment of the parties’ financial positions. This
is appropriate where the lack of good faith preceded
the formation of the contract. However, where the

CLL809

MODULE 4

lack of good faith arises after the making of the
contract and during its performance, the aggrieved
party would not be entitled to avoid the contract
from its inception. Where the parties are in
litigation, it is the procedural rules of court that
governs the extent of disclosure which should be
given in the litigation and not the marine insurance
Act provisions on disclosure.

1.3.2 Statutory Position on the Principle
1)

The principle of good faith and fair dealing in marine insurance
was prescribed in section 17, Marine Insurance Act, 1906 under
the heading ‘Disclosure and Representations’. Instructively,
under the Act, the standard was raised from “good faith” as stated
in case law to “Utmost Good Faith” indicating the highest degree
of good faith. In determining good faith, the court must strike a
balance between the interest of the policy holder in having his
legitimate claim paid and the interest of the insurer in accepting
responsibility for the risk they bargained for. The insurer cannot
keep the policy alive and seek to avoid paying a claim on the
ground of want of good faith or non-disclosure (West v National
Motor and Accidental insurance 19551 Lloyds Rep 207). To
constitute a valid avoidance the insurer must return the premium
paid by the insured.

2)

According to section 19, M.I.A. “a contract of marine insurance
is a contract based upon the utmost good faith, and, if the utmost
good faith is not observed by either party, the contract may be
avoided by the other party”

3)

Section 20, M.I.A. lays out the scope and substance of the
disclosure regime.
(1)
Subject to the provision of this section, the assured shall
disclose to the insurer before the contract is concluded,
every material circumstance which is known to the assured
and the assured shall be deemed to know every
circumstance which in the ordinary course of business
ought to be known by him. If the assured fails to make
such disclosure, the insurer may avoid the contract.
(2)
Every circumstance is material which would influence the
judgment of a prudent insurer in fixing the premium or
determining whether he will take the risk.
(3)
In the absence of inquiry, the following circumstances
need not be disclosed namely:
(a)
Any circumstance which diminishes the risk
41

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

(b)

Any circumstance which is known or presumed to
be known to the insurer, and for the purpose of his
paragraph, the presumptions shall extend and apply
to matters of common notoriety or knowledge, and
to matters which an insurer in the ordinary course
of his business, as such, ought to know;
(c)
Any circumstance as to which information is
waived;
(d)
Any circumstance which is superfluous to
disclose by reason of any express or implied
warranty.

For the purpose of this section, “circumstance” includes any
communication made to, or information received by, the assured; and
whether any particular circumstance which is not disclosed, is material
or not is, in each case of a question of fact.
1.4 Summary
The insured is under a duty to disclose in good faith material
circumstances on the risk sought to be insured. Failure to disclose
required material circumstances will enable the insurer to rescind the
insurance contract. The insured must disclose all such material
information that would enable the insurer to decide whether to accept
the risk or not and the price to undertake the risk.

1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
Manifest Shipping Co Limited v Unipolaris Insurance Co. Ltd. (The Star
Sea case)[2001]1Lloyd’s Rep.1
Pan Atlantic Insurance Co. v Pine Top Insurance Co. Ltd (1995) 1 AC
501 (HL)-

42

CLL809

UNIT 2

MODULE 4

INSURABLE INTEREST

UNIT STRUCTURE
2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Insurable Interest
2.3.1 The Nature of Insurable Interest
2.3.2 Insurable and the Statute
2.3.3 Insurable in International Marine Insurance
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
2.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction
A policyholder must stand to benefit from the preservation of a subject
matter or suffer a direct financial loss in an event that certain undesired
event insured against occurs. The insured must have a certain legal
connection to the subject matter of the insurance to insure any risk
touching on it.

2.2

Learning Outcomes

By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 state that insurable interest differentiates marine insurance from
gambling, wagering or investment schemes
 explain that marine insurance differs from the other forms of
insurance on the requirement of when insurable interest must
exist.

2.3 Insurable Interest
2.3.1 The Nature of Insurable Interest
Insurable interest in the subject matter for which insurance
cover is sought or provided is the cornerstone of the
insurance contract. The origin of this fundamental concept
dates back to the Life Assurance Act,1774 which made
insurable interest a prerequisite for obtaining a life policy.
This requirement founds its way into the Marine Insurance
Act, 1788 and later to the Marine Insurance Act,1906. The
absence of insurable interest renders the transaction a
wagering or gambling transaction which is expressly
prohibited in insurance law. According to section 6 M.I.A.
43

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

1)

Every contract of marine insurance by way of
gambling or wagering is void.
2)
A contract of marine insurance shall be deemed
to be a gaming or wagering contract
a) where the assured has not an insurable interest
as defined by this Act, and the contract is
entered into with no expectation of acquiring
such an interest, or
b) where the policy is made “interest or no
interest” or without further proof of interest
than the policy itself’ or “without benefit of
salvage to the insurer” or subject to any other
like term.
Insurable interest in any instance of marine insurance is the interest
which an assured has in the proposal taken out by him. An assured is
said to have an insurable interest in a thing if he has a benefit from its
existence or suffers a prejudice from its destruction. Such interest must
be an enforceable one. Mere hope of acquiring an interest is not enough.
The interest must also be real and of a pecuniary nature. Insurable
interest cannot be said to exist where the assured does not stand to suffer
any loss from the transaction or event.
In Broadgrain Commodities Limited v. Continental Casualty
Company 2017 ONSC 4721: 2018 ONCA 438 the plaintiff sold 26
containers of sesame seeds to be transported from Nigeria to Xingang,
China. The sale was on terms “CIF Xingang” meaning the plaintiff was
to obtain insurance but the risk of loss or damage passed to the buyer
upon shipment. The goods were insured under an open cargo policy with
the defendant and were declared under the open policy. During the
course of carriage of the goods from Nigeria to China, the good were
damaged. All the 26 containers were declared unfit for human
consumption and were sold for salvage. Even though the plaintiff had
been paid in full by the buyer, it filed a claim with the defendant insurer
which denied liability on the basis that the cause of the damage was
condensation or sweat, a non-transit related fortuity. At the plaintiff’s
suit, the insurer contended that the plaintiff had no insurable interest in
the subject matter having been paid in full by the buyer. The court held
that the plaintiff having received payment for the consignment had no
insurable interest to protect.

2.3.2 Insurable Interest and the Statute
Under the provisions of the M.I.A, every person has an insurable interest
who is interested in a marine adventure. By section 7(2)

44

CLL809

MODULE 4

“In particular a person is interested in marine
adventure where he stands in any legal or equitable
relation to the adventure or to any insurable
property at risk therein, in consequence of which he
may benefit by the safety or due arrival of insurable
property or may be prejudiced by its loss or damage
thereto, or by the detention thereof or may incur
liability in respect thereof.
For the purpose of insurable interest, insurance contracts are categorised
into three-Indemnity, non-indemnity and Marine insurance contracts. In
marine insurance, it is sufficient if the insured has interest in the subject
matter insured at the time of the loss and it is immaterial whether or not
he has interest at the time when the contract was gone into. However,
where the subject matter is insured “loss or not lost” the insured may
recover although he may not have acquired his interest until after the
loss. Defeasible, contingent or partial interests are insurable. A reinsurer
has insurable interest in the risk reinsured. (See sections 9,10,11 M.I.A)

2.3.3 Insurable Interest in International Marine Insurance
It is not unusual practice in international marine insurance practice to
find issued policies which do not require the need for proof of insurable
interest. P.P.I (Policy Proof of Interest) or F.I.A (Full Interest Admitted)
contracts are used to insure interests where it is difficult to prove that
insurable interest exist or difficult to prove the amount at risk. Despite
their commercial convenience, they are equated with gambling or
wagering and thus considered void under the M.I.A.

2.4 Summary
In marine insurance, the insured must have insurable interest in the
subject matter insured at the time of the loss. An insured must have an
insurable interest in the marine insurance contract. A person has
insurable interest where he stands in any legal or equitable relation to
the adventure or to any insurable property at risk therein, in consequence
of which he may benefit by the safety or due arrival of insurable
property, or may be prejudiced by its loss, damage, detention or incur
any liability in respect thereof

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Oyeniyi Ajiboye, “A Review of the Doctrine of Insurable Interest under
the Marine Insurance Act in Nigeria” The Gravitas Review of
Business and Property Law, Sept. 2016, Vol.7, No.3, 15.

45

CLL809

UNIT 3

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

SUBROGATION

UNIT STRUCTURE
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcome
3.3 Subrogation
3.4 Summary
3.5 References for Further Reading

3.1 Introduction
Where the insured has been indemnified, the insurer succeeds to his
rights against the wrong doer. This is an exception to the rule of privity
of contract.

3.2 Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 to explain that a third party who may have caused the peril insured
against could still be liable for the wrong done notwithstanding the
fact that the insurer has assumed the responsibility to make good the
loss.

3.3

Subrogation

3.3.1 This is a procedure where the insurer on payment of the loss is
entitled to be placed in the position of the insured by succeeding
to all his rights and remedies against third parties in respect of the
subject matter of the insurance. In this situation, since the insurer
has made good the loss, he is then entitled to claim or be
indemnified by the third party. The right of subrogation rests
upon the ground that the insurer’s contract is in the nature of a
contract of indemnity and that he is, therefore, entitled, upon
paying a sum for which others are primarily liable to the assured,
to be proportionately subrogated to the right of action of the
assured against them. The insurance principle of subrogation
reinforces the indemnity character of insurance. According to
section 80(1) M.I.A,
Where the insurer pays for a total loss, either of the
whole, or in the case of goods of any apportionable
part of the subject matter insured, he shall
thereupon become entitled to take over the interest
of the assured in whatever may remain of the
subject matter so paid for, and shall thereby be
subrogated to all the rights and remedies of the
46

CLL809

MODULE 4

assured in and in respect of the subject matter as
from the time of the casualty causing the loss.
This section enunciates two fundamental principles of insurance law and
rights of an insurer in an insurance contract: the right of subrogation and
the salvage principle. Where the loss is caused by the fault of another or
where by contract another person is liable to bear the loss insured
against if the insured claim from the insurer and he is paid, the insurer
then succeeds to the rights of the insured against the third party. Where
the insured obtains any remedy from a third party for the same loss, he
must revert to the insurer. Being paid by the insurer does not preclude
him from seeking reliefs from the wrongdoer who caused the loss. He
does this on behalf of the insurer who is said to be subrogated to his
rights.
3.3.2 The principle of subrogation comes into effect when the assured
receives satisfaction from his insurer; whatever he receives
thereafter he holds in trust for the insurer. Subrogation rests on
the ground that the insurer’s contract is one of indemnity and is
therefore entitle upon paying the sum for which others are
primarily liable to the assured to be proportionately subrogated to
the right of the assured. In practice, at times the Insurer will
require the assured to sign a subrogation form to assist the insurer
press claim against third parties: very often such forms are
worded thus “In consideration for the payment of the sum of…for
the loss of… I hereby abandon to you all my rights, title and
interest in the said…”
3.3.3 It must be noted that the right does not arise unless and until the
insurer has admitted the insured’s claim under the policy and has
paid the sum payable under the policy. Furthermore, the insurer
cannot recover more than the amount it has paid. In
YORKSHIRE INS. CO. LTD. v. NISBET SHPPING CO.
LTD. (1961) 1 Lloyd’s Rep 479, a ship was insured under a
valued policy for E72,000(pounds). It became a total loss as a
result of a collision with another vessel. The insurer paid the
valued policy of E72,000(pounds) to the assured. The assured
claimed damages from the Canadian government and recovered
E127,000(pounds). The assured repaid E72,000(pounds) to the
insurer and kept the excess. The Court held that the insurer was
not entitled to recover the excess from the assured.

3.4

Summary

Subrogation enables the insurer succeeds to the rights of the insured
against third person(s) that have caused the loss for which the insurer
has indemnified the insured. Subrogation strengthens the indemnity
47

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

character of insurance. Where the insurer pays a loss insured against, he
shall be subrogated to all the rights and remedies of the assured in
respect of the subject matter. The insurer must have paid the claim and
is entitled to what has been paid out to the assured.

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
See British India General Insurance Co. Ltd v. Kalla (1965) 1 All NLR
20.

48

CLL809

MODULE 4

UNIT 4

DOUBLE INSURANCE AND CONTRIBUTION

UNIT STRUCTURE
4.1
Introduction
4.2
Learning Outcome
4.3
Double Insurance and Contribution
4.3.1 The Concept of Double Insurance
4.3.2 Principle of Contribution
4.4
Summary
4.5
References/Further Reading/Web Sources
4.6
Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

4.1 Introduction
Where the marine risk is insured with more than one insurer, the insurers
will proportionately bear the burden of the risk in the event of a loss or
damage.

4.2 Learning Outcome
By the end of this unit, you will be able to:
 explain that in the event of over insurance, equity seeks a fair
distribution of the risk among the various insurers.

4.3

Double Insurance and Contribution

4.3.1 The Concept of Double Insurance
The concept of double insurance allows an insured under a coinsurance arrangement to insure the same subject matter of the
insurance with more than one insurance company. In the event of
the occurrence of the event insured against, he is free to claim
payment from his insurers in such order as he thinks fit until he has
received the full amount for his loss (Section 33, M.I.A). In
exercising this right, the insured is free to call upon any of his
insurers to pay him in full and the fact that others are also liable
will not afford the insurer any defence. Effectually, once the
insured receives full payment from one insurer, he cannot receive
further payment from other insurers.
4.3.2 Principle of Contribution
As a corollary to the duty of an insurer to pay in case of double
insurance, is the right of such an insurer to call upon the other insurer(s)
to contribute their share in indemnifying the assured for the loss, to the
insurer. This right is known as the right to contribution. According to
49

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

section 81(1), M.I.A “Where the assured is over insured by double
insurance, each insurer shall be bound, as between himself and the
other insurers, to contribute ratably to the loss in proportion to the
amount for which he is liable under his contract. Before a right of
contribution can be enforced, the following conditions must be satisfied.
(a)
There must be a subject matter common to all the policies
taken by the insured. Once the insurer can show that the
subject matter insured with him has also been insured with
another insurer, he can call on the latter to contribute
ratably to the discharge of the obligation under the policy.
(b)
The loss must be due to a risk or peril common to all the
policies. The loss and the cause of the loss must have been
covered by the several policies.
(c)
All the policies must be enforceable. If any of the policies
cannot be legally enforced against the insurer, as a result
of a breach of a condition or non-disclosure by the insured,
such a policy will not give rise to a right to contribution,
even if the insurer had paid the insured under such a
policy.

50

CLL809

MODULE 4

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
1. A marine insurance is a contract of good faith because
a. It is fiduciary in nature
b. It is a contract of Uberimae fidei
c. the insured is required to disclose all material facts on the
subject matter of the insurance to the insurer
d. All of the above is correct.
2. By insurable interest the assured is expected to
a. Own the property sought to be insured at all times before
the policy of insurance is issued.
b. Benefit from the existence of the property and suffer a
prejudice from its destruction.
c. Insure the property at all times with Lloyds of London
Insurance market.
d. Reinsure the property for twice its value.
3. Subrogation enables the
a. Insurer on payment of a claim to succeed to the rights of
the insured against third parties that caused the loss.
b. Insurer to make profit by making a double claim against
third parties.
c. Insurer to avoid the contract with the insured
d. Insured to sue third parties and the insurer.
4. Marine insurance is a contract of indemnity because
a. The insured can freely speculate on possible profit from
the contract.
b. As a matter of fact, the insured is gambling with the risk
in view.
c. The law allows the assured to engage in a scheme of
wager as far as the risk insured against is concerned.
d. The insured is sought to be restored as near as possible to
the position he was before the loss insured against.
5. Double insurance enables the
a. The insured to claim from all the insurers far and above
his loss.
b. Insured obtain reinsurance of the risk contemplated.
c. National Insurance Commission to also regulate the
banking industry in Nigeria.
d. One insurer in a co-insurance arrangement to obtain
ratable contributions from other insurers for the loss it
has indemnified the assured.
51

CLL809

LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE I

4.4 Summary
The principle of double insurance and the right to contribution
reinforces the character of marine insurance as essentially an indemnity
contract. Where the assured is over insured by double insurance, each
insurer shall be bound, as between himself and the other insurers, to
contribute ratably to the loss in proportion to the amount for which he is
liable under his contract. Before a right of contribution can be enforced,
there must be a subject matter common to all the policies taken by the
insured; the loss must be due to a risk or peril common to all the policies
and all the policies must be enforceable.

4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
Susan Hodges, Law of Marine Insurance, Cavendish Publishing
Limited, Great Britain, 1996.
Rose F.D. Marine Insurance Law and Practice, Lloyd’s of London Press.
London,2004.
Reference Book of Marine Insurance Clauses, 69thed, Witherby & CO.
Ltd., London, 1997.
Interesting websites:
http://www.bmla.org.uk.
http://www.1malloyds.com

52

CLL809

MODULE 4

4.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1. d
2. b
3. a
4. d
5. d

53

