NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
    SCHOOL OF POSTGRADUATE STUDIES

               FACULTY OF LAW

               COURSE CODE: CLL810
COURSE TITLE: LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE II

                                                                                                                   1
       NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

Headquarters
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone,
University Village,
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway,
JABI - ABUJA
URL: www.nou.edu.ng

Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos

Published by
National Open University of Nigeria

Printed
ISBN:

All Rights Reserved

                                                                                                                              2
Course Code:           COURSE INFORMATION
Course Title:              CLL810

                           LAW OF MARINE INSURANCE II

Credit Unit:           3

Pre-Requisite Course:

Course Status:         C

Semester:              ONE

Required Study Hours:

Edition:               2022

                                                       3
                          COURSE TEAM

Course Developer/Writer:  Prof. Augustine R. Agom

Course Editor:            Prof D.C. John

Programme Leader:         Dr Ernest O. Ugbejeh

Programme Co-ordinator:   F.O. ONAMSON, PhD

                                                   4
TABLE OF CONTENTS              PAGE
Introduction
Course Aim                                                           5
Course Learning Outcomes
Working through this course
Course Materials
Study Units
Textbooks and Reference
Assessment
Self-Assessment Exercises
Final Examination and Grading
Course Score Distribution
Course Overview/Presentation
How to get the most from this course.
Tutors and Tutorials.
Summary

CLL810 ­ Law of Marine Insurance

COURSE GUIDE

INTRODUCTION
The maritime industry is very important in the conduct of the business of the carriage of persons,
goods and services. It is feasibly the most cost-effective way to move large cargoes from one
country to another over a large distance. According to the International Maritime organization
(IMO) over 90% of the worlds trade is carried by sea. The contribution of marine transport in the
movement of industrial plants, machinery, equipments, goods and services across long distance is
indeed immense. The associated challenges of maritime mishap can be quite ruinous without a
hedging scheme to protect maritime stakeholders. Maritime activities would simply be impossible
without the risk mitigating presence of marine insurance.

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE.
The course is divided into two: Law of Marine Insurance 1(CLL805) and Marine Insurance 11
(CLL810). Law of Marine Insurance 1 provided a basic understanding of the regulatory framework
for marine insurance law in Nigeria. This Law of Marine Insurance 11 is an expose on the legal
issues in marine insurance. Right and obligations of parties to marine insurance contracts and the
legal relationship of marine insurance intermediaries are discussed. These are undertaken as
specific issues under the various study units in very simple and digestible language.

                                                                                                                              6
COURSE MATERIALS
The major components of the course are.

    a) Course guide.
    b) Study Units.
    c) Textbooks
    d) Assignment file/Seminar Paper
    e) Presentation schedule.

MODULES AND STUDY UNITS
The discussion in this course is broken down to 12 study units that are broadly divided into FOUR
(4) modules as follows ­

MODULE 1 FORMATION OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACT
Unit 1 ­ Negotiation/Proposal
Unit 2 ­ Consideration/Premium
Unit 3 ­ The Insurance Policy
MODULE 2 CONTRACTUAL TERMS
Unit 1 ­ Conditions and Warranties
Unit 2 ­ Implied Warranty
Unit 3 ­ Excess and Average Clauses.
MODULE 3 MARINE INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES
Unit 1 ­ Intermediaries
Unit 2 ­ Obligations and Rights of Intermediaries

                                                                                                                              7
MODULE 4 ASSIGNMENT OF MARIEN INSURANCE POLICY
Unit 1 ­ Definition of Consumerism and Consumer Rights
MODULE 5 OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS
Unit 1 ­ Rights of the Assured
Unit 2 ­ Righters of the Insurer
MODULE 6 SETTLEMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS
Unit 1 ­ Preliminary Issues
Unit 2 ­ Measure of Indemnity
Unit 3 ­ Excluded Losses

All these Units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and values, which merit your
attention and thought. Tackle them in separate study periods. You may require several hours for
each.
We suggest that the Modules be studied one after the other, since they are linked by a common
theme. You will gain more from them if you have first carried out work on the law of contract.
You will then have a clearer picture into which to paint these topics. Subsequent units are written
on the assumption that you have completed previous Units.
Each study unit consists of one week's work and includes specific Learning Outcomes, directions
for study, reading materials and Self-Assessment Exercises (SAE). Together, these exercises will
assist you in achieving the stated Learning Outcomes of the individual units and of the course.

REFERENCES / FURTHER READING

                                                                                                                              8
References and further reading materials are provided at the end of each study unit. The need to
consult these materials cannot be overemphasized to deepen and broaden understanding of the
issues at stake. You should read them where so directed before attempting the exercise.

ASSESSMENT
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor Marked Assignments and a
written examination. In doing these assignments you are expected to apply knowledge acquired
during the course. The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file. The
work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
Self-assessment questions are raised at the end of each module to measure the level of successful
engagement with the legal issues covered. The answers in the body of the main text are distilled
and put up at the end of the course material. This will enable you to understand and apply legal
principles to practical situations in resolving legal matters in the field of marine insurance law.

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING
The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and will carry 70% of the total
course grade. The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self-assessment
exercises and the tutor marked problems you have previously encountered. All aspects of the
course will be assessed. You should use the time between completing the last unit and taking the
examination to revise the entire course. You may find it useful to review yourself assessment
exercises and tutor marked assignments before the examination.

                                                                                                                              9
COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.

Assessment                                      Marks

Assignments 1-4 (the best three of all the Four assignments. Best three marks of the

assignments submitted)                          four counts at 30% of course marks.

Final examination                               70% of overall course score

Total                                           100% of course score.

Course Overview and Presentation Schedule

Module / Unit                    Title of Work         Weeks Assessment
                                                       Activity
MODULE 1 FORMATION OF MARINE INSURANCE
                    CONTRACT                                         (End of Unit)
                                                                    Assignment 1
Unit 1         Negotiation/Proposal
                                                                    Assignment 2
Unit 2         Consideration/Premium
                                                                                    10
Unit 3         The Insurance Policy

MODULE 2 CONTRACTUAL TERMS

Unit 1         Conditions and Warranties

Unit 2         Implied Warranty

Unit 3         Excess and Average Clauses
MODULE 3 MARINE INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES               Assignment 3
                                                       Assignment 4
Unit 1  Intermediaries                                 Assignment 4
                                                       Assignment 4
Unit 2  Obligations and Rights of Intermediaries

MODULE 4 ASSIGNMENT OF MARIEN INSURANCE
                    POLICY

Unit 1  Definition of Consumerism and Consumer Rights

MODULE 5 OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO MARINE
                    INSURANCE CONTRACTS

Unit 1  Rights of the Assured

Unit 2  Righters of the Insurer

MODULE 6 SETTLEMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE
                    CONTRACTS

Unit 1  Preliminary Issues

Unit 2  Measure of Indemnity

Unit 3  Excluded Losses

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THE COURSE.

It is very important that the discussion on this course is participatory. It is equally important that
the references are consulted. The effusive references to provisions of the Marine Insurance Act,
2004 in the course guide is to enable you become very familiar with the law.

TUTORS AND TUTORIALS
                                                                                                                             11
There are 11 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You will be notified of the dates,
times and location of the tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon
as you are allocated a tutorial group. Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter. Your tutor may
help and provide assistance to you during the course. You must send your Tutor Marked
Assignments to your tutor well before the due date. They will be marked by your tutor and returned
to you as soon as possible.
Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if:

      You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
      You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
      You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on an

          assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance to have face to face contact
with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly. You can raise any problem
encountered in the course of your study. To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials,
prepare a question list before attending them. You will gain a lot from participating actively.

                                                                                                                             12
                                               TABLE OF CONTENT  PAGE
                                            MODULE/UNIT`
                                                                   14
MODULE 1 FORMATION OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACT                    19
Unit 1 ­ Negotiation/Proposal                                      22
Unit 2 ­ Consideration/Premium
Unit 3 ­ The Insurance Policy                                      27
                                                                   32
MODULE 2 CONTRACTUAL TERMS                                         35
Unit 1 ­ Conditions and Warranties
Unit 2 ­ Implied Warranty                                          38
Unit 3 ­ Excess and Average Clauses                                43

MODULE 3 MARINE INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES                           47
Unit 1 ­ Intermediaries
Unit 2 ­ Obligations and Rights of Intermediaries                  50
                                                                   52
MODULE 4 ASSIGNMENT OF MARIEN INSURANCE POLICY
Unit 1 ­ Definition of Consumerism and Consumer Rights             55
                                                                   58
MODULE 5 OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO MARINE INSURANCE                61
CONTRACTS
Unit 1 ­ Rights of the Assured                                        13
Unit 2 ­ Righters of the Insurer

MODULE 6 SETTLEMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS
Unit 1 ­ Preliminary Issues
Unit 2 ­ Measure of Indemnity
Unit 3 ­ Excluded Losses
MODULE 1 FORMATION OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACT

Unit 1: Negotiation/Proposal

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Negotiation/Proposal
1.4 Summary
1.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction
       Formation of marine insurance contract is the product of a successful negotiation by parties
       on the major aspects of the insurance. The negotiations and the contract must be in the
       manner and form stipulated in the enabling law or customs and usages of the marine
       insurance industry. The negotiation between the assured and the insurer is essentially on the
       peril(s) sought to protected against and the premium payable. The clauses in the contract are
       fairly standardized. The assured begins the process of forming the contract by completing
       and submitting a proposal to the insurer.

1.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the completion of this unit, you will know that the proposal submitted by the insured
       constitutes the offer and in it he must make all necessary disclosures. In this arrangement,
       parties have freedom of contract; however, like all standard form contracts where one of the
       parties has more bargaining power, it is important to know that the facts that the insurer
       considers material are often elicited in the proposal for the assured to furnish information on
       thus controlling the quality and scope of facts material to the contract.

1.3 Negotiation/Proposal
           1.3.1 A contract of marine insurance will come into existence following the negotiation
                by the parties to the contract, in this case the assured and insurer. It commences when

                                                                                                                             14
       the insured makes an offer and the insurer accepts the offer. The broker will prepare
       a slip on receiving instruction to insure from the ship owner, merchant or other
       proposer. Strictly speaking proposal forms so common in other branches of
       insurances are not so commonly in use in marine insurance. The slip called "the
       original slip" is used for the proposal. The original slip is accompanied with other
       material information which the broker deems necessary for the purpose. The brokers
       are experts and well versed in marine insurance law and practice. The insured makes
       an offer by completing and submitting a proposal to the insurer. The proposal is
       normally designed and printed by the insurer or his agent. An insured who procures
       the service of an agent to fill out the proposal for him must accept the act of such
       agent as his own act and take responsibility for it. In Northern Assurance Company
       v. Stephen Idugboe (1966) 1 All NLR, 88, the insured in filling a proposal form for
       a comprehensive insurance cover, was assisted by an insurance agent and his own
       clerk and thereafter signed the form. Even though he had disclosed correct
       information to these two, they did not disclose the information in completing the
       form. When the plaintiff sought to claim for total loss under the contract, the insurer
       denied liability on the ground of non disclosure of material facts. Allowing the appeal
       against the judgment which held the insurer liable, the Supreme Court held:

          In my view...where the agent himself, at the request of the proposer, fills up
          the answer in purported conformity with the information supplied by the
          proposer. If the answers are untrue and he knows it, he is committing a fraud
          which prevents his knowledge being the knowledge of the insurance company.
          If the answers are untrue, but he does not know it, I do not understand how he
          has any knowledge which can be imputed to the insurance company. In any
          case I have great difficulty in understanding how a man who has signed,
          without reading it, a document which he knows to be a proposal for insurance
          and which contains statements in fact untrue, and a promise that they are true,
          and the basis of the contract, can escape from the consequences of his
          negligence by saying that the person he asked to fill it up for him is the agent
          of the person to whom the proposal is addressed.

1.3.2 The proposal usually elicits information or particulars of the risk which the insured
    wishes the insurer to undertake. Particularly, information regarding name, address,
    insured interest, subject matter, valuation of subject matter, existing insurer, etc. The

                                                                                                                   15
    proposal for a hull insurance cover may be more detail requiring information on years
    of manufacture and current registration. It is important that the insured have recourse
    to the declaration clause before signing same. A typical declaration reads:

          I/We confirm that the foregoing statements and answers are true and complete
          and that I/we have not withheld any material information likely to affect the
          acceptance of this proposal. I//we agree that this proposal and declaration
          shall form the basis of the contract between Tokio Marine Insurance
          Company Singapore Limited (TMIS) and ourselves and I/we will accept a
          policy subject to the company's standard terms and conditions of the Policy.

1.3.3 Once an offer is made, it remains in force until it is either withdrawn before
    acceptance or lapsed after a reasonable period of time. A withdrawal of an offer will
    not be effective, until notice of the withdrawal is received by the insurer. It is up to the
    insurer to accept or decline the offer.

1.3.4 Acceptance of the offer is deemed to have been properly made, when the insurer
    issues a policy to the insured or does something in writing affirming acceptance.
    According to section 23, M.I.A, a contract of marine insurance shall be deemed to be
    concluded when the proposal of the assured is accepted by the insurer, whether the
    policy is then issued or not. For the purpose of showing that the proposal was accepted
    reference may be made to the slip or covering note or other customary memorandum
    of the contract.

1.3.5 Where the insurer issues a slip, covering note or memorandum to the insured, the
    insurer will be bound during the provisional cover and the assured shall be entitled to
    recover in the event of loss contemplated by the policy. The provisional cover is a
    formal document issued to an insured to protect him against the occurrence of the risk
    in the interval between the submission of the proposal form and the issue of the
    insurance policy. The provisional cover notes are always issued for a definite period.

1.3.6 An acceptance must correspond to the terms of the offer. Where the insurer accepts
    the proposal subject to the payment of premium, the contract becomes binding only on

                                                                                                                   16
            the tender to the insurer of that premium. Tender of the premium then amounts to an
            acceptance of the insurer's counter-offer by the insured. If the risk insured against
            occurs before the payment of the premium, the insurer does not assume responsibility
            for the loss. This is important because of the flexibility which the Marine Insurance Act
            2004, allows with regard to the time for payment of premium.

        1.3.7 If the risk insured against occurs before acceptance, the insurer will not be liable.
            The duty to disclose all material facts binds the insured and insurer until acceptance,
            so that a non-disclosure of a material fact before acceptance will render the contract of
            insurance voidable at the instance of the insurer. Where the risk occurs, unknown to
            the insurer but known to the insured, and the former inadvertently issued the policy,
            the insurer will be entitled to avoid it on the ground of concealment of material fact
            which the insured is bound to disclose in the proposal form. Where, unknown to both
            parties, the loss occurred before the contract, a policy issued subsequently by the
            insurer could be void because of common mistake and the insured will not be entitled
            to recover under such a policy.

        1.3.8 The industry practice is that the proposal form contains standard clauses with
            practically little or no input at all by the assured except for answers supplied to demand
            for information on the subject matter. On the whole the insurer is more strategically
            positioned to skew the terms and clauses in its favour. This is a common challenge with
            standard form contracts. Dover observed of this market practice:

                  "The most serious objection to standard clauses was that in many instances,
                  they were not a product of the free balancing of interests resulting from
                  negotiation between the parties to the contract but a dictate from the
                  stronger, or at least the better organized, of the parties"

1.4 Summary
      Insurance is a contract. Its formation begins with the negotiation of the parties. In insurance,
      the assured makes his offer by completing and submitting a proposal to the insurer. The
      assured initiates the process of marine insurance contract formation by making an offer by

                                                                                                                            17
      completing a proposal form or slip obtained from the insurer. In the proposal form, the
      assured is under obligation to make material disclosures on the subject matter. The insurer
      may accept the offer by the issuance of the policy or a slip or memorandum evidencing the
      fact of the contract.
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
       1) V. Dover Uniformity in Marine Insurance Policy, Form and Clauses (Gpoteborg,

           Akademiforlaget-Gumpers,1963) p15.
       2) Visit https://www.tokiomarine.com
       3) Visit also https://www.lonpac.com

                                                                                                                            18
MODULE 1 FORMATION OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACT

Unit 2: Consideration/Premium

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Consideration/Premium
2.4 Summary
2.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

2.1 Introduction
       Like all valid contracts, there must be the exchange of considerations. In the law of marine
       insurance, the consideration payable by the assured to the insurer to provide the cover against
       the risk insured against is called the premium.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the end of this unit, you should know that in marine insurance, consideration is very
       important. In insurance law generally, unless premium is paid, no cover can be provided. In
       marine insurance, it is not strictly so as the agreement of the parties can make flexible the
       time for payment of premium.

2.3 Consideration/ Premium
         2.3.1 The assured and the insurer must furnish considerations to sustain the insurance
             contract. While the insurer undertakes to indemnify the assured in the event of the peril
             contemplated, the latter is obliged to pay a price called premium to the insurer for
             assuming the risk. In the absence of fraud, an acknowledgment of receipt of premium
             on the policy effected by a broker on behalf of the assured is conclusive evidence of
             payment of premium by the assured to the assured. The premium may not always be
             money, it may be in some other from, e.g., in a mutual insurance it may consist of a
             guarantee to contribute to the losses from other members of the mutual society.

                                                                                                                             19
2.3.2 Marine insurance law differs from general insurance law on this point. In general
    insurance, the legal requirement on payment of premium is `no premium no insurance.
    According to section 50 (1) Insurance Act, 2003,

          "The receipt of an insurance premium shall be a condition precedent to a
          valid contract of insurance and there shall be no cover in respect of an
          insurance risk, unless the premium paid in advance"

         In Ajaokuta Steel Co v. Corporate Insurance (2004) 16 NWLR, Pt.899, 369 the
         Court upheld the principle of `no premium no insurance'. In marine insurance
         however the law allows some flexibility. According to section 53, M.I.A

          Unless otherwise agreed, the duty of the assured or his agent to pay the
          premium, and the duty of the insurer to issue the policy to the assured or his
          agent are concurrent conditions, and the insurer shall not be bound to issue
          the policy until payment or tender of the premium.[underlining for emphasis]
         From this provision, the time for payment of premium may be fixed by the parties.
         Where insurance is effected at a premium or additional to be arranged in a given
         event and that event happens but no arrangement is made, the insurance is
         nonetheless valid: a reasonable additional premium shall be payable. This
         flexibility, in no way diminishes the importance of premium in marine insurance as
         the price payable by the insured.

2.3.3 When considering premium for a particular risk, an insurer will reckon with various
    considerations applicable to the risk that may affect the likelihood of a loss occurring
    and the amount of the insurer's potential liability. In the case of hull insurance, type
    and age of vessel, tonnage, motive power, state of equipment, trading limits, types of
    cargo carried, vessel's management crew, past claim experience, date of last survey,
    classification symbol of vessel are important factors. For cargo insurance, nature and
    value of the cargo, packaging, type of vessel, nature of the voyage, claims record of the
    shipper etc are important considerations.

                                                                                                                   20
2.4 Summary
       The consideration furnished by the assured in a marine insurance contract is called a
       premium. Unless provided otherwise, the payment of premium and issuance of policy must
       be concurrent. Consideration is very important in marine insurance Contract and it is called
       premium. The insurance policy must state the premium for which the risk is undertaken.
       Unless otherwise agreed by the parties, the payment of premium and the issuance of the
       policy must be concurrent.

2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
       Susan Hodges, Law of Marine Insurance, Cavendish Publishing Limited, Great Britain,
       1996.

                                                                                                                             21
MODULE 1 FORMATION OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACT

Unit 3: The Insurance Policy

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 The Insurance Policy
3.4 Summary
3.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction.
       Upon the conclusion of the negotiation, the insurer shall issue the insurance policy covering
       the risk insured against. The size of the risk covered and the amount of premium payable are
       fixed by the policy.

3.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the end of this unit, you should know that the basis of the marine insurance contract is the
       Insurance policy. First Schedule to the Marine Insurance Act, 2004 is a precedent form of
       Marine Insurance Policy.

3.3 The Insurance Policy.
       3.3.1 A contract of marine insurance is entered into when the proposal of the assured is
              accepted by the insurer. To show that the proposal was accepted reference may be
              made to the slip or covering note or other customary memorandum of the contract.
              Section 24 M.I.A provides
                (1) Subject to the provisions of any statutes, a contract of marine insurance shall
                     not be admissible in evidence unless it is embodied in a marine policy in
                     accordance with the form in the First Schedule to this Act or to the like effect
                (2) The policy may be executed and issued either at the time when the contract is
                     concluded, or afterwards; and subject to the provisions of this Act and unless
                     the context of the policy otherwise requires, the terms and expressions mentioned
                     in the First Schedule to this Act shall be construed as having the scope and
                     meaning in that Schedule assigned to them.

                                                                                                                             22
         (3) Nothing in this section shall affect the operation of a contract for such insurance
               as is mentioned in section 368 of the Merchant Shipping Act.

      The First Schedule to the Marine Insurance Act provides a precedent form of marine
      insurance policy. The policy shall specify the name of the insured or the person who
      effects the insurance on his behalf and duly signed by the insurer. It contains particulars
      of the parties, subject matter of the contract, premium, signature of the assured and the
      amount assured. Rules for construction of the policy are annexed to the Form for guide
      of parties. The subject matter insured shall be designated with reasonable certainty. The
      wordings of a marine insurance policy are to a great extent based on mercantile customs
      and business convenience.

3.3.2 In placing the policy, the assured must give full details on the subject sought to be
        insured. In giving full description of the risk, he must state what it is, value, destination,
        departing, etc for the insurer to decide whether to accept the risk and at what premium.
        The disclosures and representations must be accurate. The law governing disclosure
        and representation by the parties stipulate that the contract is based upon the utmost
        good faith and is voidable at the instance of the injured party if the good faith standard
        is not maintained. The assured must disclose to the insurer before the contact is
        concluded every material circumstance which is known or ought to have been known
        to the assured in the ordinary course of his business. Any material fact represented to
        the insurer in the course of the negotiations for the contract must be correct. A material
        circumstance or representation is defined to be that which would influence the
        judgment of a prudent insurer in fixing the premium or in determining whether he
        would take the risk. If the assured fails to disclose material information or misrepresent
        a material fact, the insurer may avoid liability for losses under the policy though the
        loss may be caused by some circumstance entirely unrelated to the innocent non
        disclosure or misrepresentation.

3.3.3 A marine insurance policy may stipulate the value of the insured object as agreed upon
        by the parties. The value agreed upon in the policy, as between the insured and insurer,
        is conclusive of the actual or insurable value of the object. Alternatively the policy
        may not specify the value of the insured object thus leaving the insurable value to be

                                                                                                                      23
        ascertained at the time of loss or damage. The conclusiveness of the agreed value as to
        the insurable value of the insured object provides a useful guide in the future as regards
        the indemnity payable in the event of a loss. In practice virtually all cargo and hull
        insurance are valued policies.

3.3.4 In international marine insurance practice the (London market-Lloyds of London)
        precedent in the S.G. Form accompanied with the desired Institute Clauses has gain
        prominence. The British marine insurance policy is based upon an ancient document
        called the "Lloyd's S.G. Form" adopted by Lloyds in 1779 and has virtually remain
        unchanged and incorporated in the First Schedule to the UK Marine Insurance Act,
        1906. The Form may be used for hull and cargo insurance. In terms of details, the Form
        contains various provisions, by completing the appropriate blank spaces, the assured
        set forth a description of the parties, voyage, subject matter insured, name of vessel
        and master, duration of the risk, certain liberties in the routing of the voyage (touch
        and stay clause), value of the insured subject matter (Valuation clause) risk insured
        against (Perils clause), certain liberties of the assured and insurer to minimize the
        extent of casualties ( sue and labour clause and the waiver clause), the promise by the
        insurer to insure the property (Binding clause), receipt of the premium (attestation
        clause), certain limitations in the payment of claims ( memorandum clause). A typical
        peril clause in the Lloyds S.G. Form reads

               "Touching the adventures and perils which we the assurers are contented to
               bear and do take upon us in this voyage: they are of the seas, men of war,
               fire, enemies, pirates, rovers, thieves, jettisons, letters of mart and counter
               mart, surprisals, takings at sea, arrests, restraints, and detainments of all
               kings, princes, and people, of what nation, condition, or quality so ever,
               barratry of the master and mariners, and of all other perils, losses, and
               misfortunes, that have or shall come to the hurt, detriment, or damage of the
               said goods and merchandises, and ship, etc., or any part thereof.

        The inability to alter this centuries old precedent has resulted in the need to attach
        lengthy amending clauses to the original policy form as a means of keeping pace with
        modern development of marine insurance. So many of such clauses are drafted under

                                                                                                                      24
the auspices of the Institute of London Underwriters (ILU) and are referred to as the
"Institute Clauses".

Most hull insurances are underwritten on a time basis and thus usually subject to a
standard set of clauses called the "Institute Time Clauses: Hull" in addition to the S.G
Form. In the case of cargo Insurance, three standard options are prominent "Institute
Cargo Clauses: F.P.A.(Free of Particular Average)" ; "Institute Cargo Clauses:
W.A(With Average)" "Institute Cargo Clauses: A.R.(All Risks)". The various
standard clauses spell out the details of the contract.

The Institute Clauses have caused some modernisation to the Lloyds S.G.Form. Even
then, the entire policy document is still very complex and challenging to construct and
interpret. In Atlantic Maritime Co Incorporated v. Gibbon [1953] 2 Lloyd's
Rep.294,CA, it court stated

   The policy is...based upon...[the SG Form] to which numerous slips...have
   been added so that little indeed is left of the original foundation...I have no
   doubt that those engaged in this class of business find it convenient that their
   policies should take this form. But... the task of the Court in construing the
   resultant document or documents in certainly rendered more difficult. The very
   numerous cases to which we have been referred make it not, indeed easy, to
   contend that those entering into this class of business well understand the
   conventional accumulation of clauses which constitute the policy"

In Panamanian Oriental Steamship Corporation v. Wright [1971] 1 Lloyd's Rep
487 CA Justice Mocata solicited

   It is probably too late to make an effective plea that the traditional methods of
   insuring against ordinary marine risks and what are usually called war risks
   should be radically overhauled. The present method, certainly as regards war
   risk insurance, is tortuous and complex in the extreme. It cannot be beyond the
   wits of underwriters and those who advise them in this age of law reform to
   devise more straightforward and easily comprehended terms of cover.

Suggestions for reforms have been advanced to revise the standard clauses, update
grammar, simplify the clauses and do away with antiquated terminologies. in the
present form adopted in marine insurance contract. The complexity makes it difficult
not only for the courts but for the parties as well, especially in developing countries

                                                                                                             25
              developing capacity and expertise in the marine insurance industry. Alterations to the
              SG Form have been resisted on the ground that it has been subject to such a large
              amount of litigation over the years that its meanings are now clear. It is feared that any
              improvements would initiate a flood of litigation to clarify the new wording.
         3.3.5 At the end of the policy, the insurer must commit itself to be bound by the
             undertaking it has given. A marine policy must be signed by the insurer, where two or
             more insurers are parties, they must sign since each constitute separate contract unless
             the contrary is indicated.

                                                SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE
                                    Outline the major steps you will take in the formation
                                    of a marine Insurance contract.
3.4 Summary
       A marine insurance policy is expected to conform with the First Schedule to the Marine
       Insurance Act, 2004. In international marine insurance, the Lloyd's S.G. Form accompanied
       with Institute Clauses is prominently in use. The insurance policy shall contain details of the
       risk insured against and the premium payable. The contract of marine insurance is required
       in an insurance policy in the form as shown in the First Schedule to the M.I.A.
3.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
       Prof D. Rhidian Thomas, The Modern Law of Marine Insurance, Volume Four, Informa Law
       from Routledge,New York, 2016.
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

                                                                                                                             26
    a. Needs assessment- Determine whether it is a hull or cargo insurance?
          b. Choose an insurance company with the capacity to take the risk.
                                                         c. Fill out the proposal form
d. Ensure the insurance policy is issued or at least a slip or memorandum

                                                              evidencing the cover.
e. Have recourse to the form of the policy and ensure compliance with

                                      Schedule 1, Marine Insurance Act, 2004.
                                                          f. Pay the agreed premium.
MODULE 2 CONTRACTUAL TERMS

Unit 1: Conditions and Warranties

    1.1 Introduction
    1.2 Learning Outcomes
    1.3 Conditions and Warranties
    1.4 Summary
    1.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction.
       Contractual terms define the insurance relationship. These terms confer the status of assured
       and insurer and measure their rights and obligations. In negotiating an insurance contract,
       the parties make representations to each other of their expectations. These representations
       eventually filter into conditions and warranties that underlie the contract.

1.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the end of this unit, you should know that in marine insurance, condition and warranty
       determine the obligation of the parties to the contract. Furthermore, they are fundamental as
       the breach of either of them entitles the other to avoid the contract. There is a point of
       difference here between law of contract and marine insurance contract.

1.3 Conditions and Warranties.
         1.3.1 The basis of the contractual relation is the terms settled by the parties. In the course
             of negotiating a marine insurance contract statements/representations are made of the
             expectations of the parties on the subject and terms of the risk to be covered. The
             statements form the basis of the contract and their correctness or otherwise may impact,
             enhance or hurt the contract. Representation is the information advanced by the assured
             to the insurer. The assured's answers to the various questions in the Proposal Form/slip
             and personal statements are representations, on the strength of which the insurer
             assesses the risk, compute premium and enter into the contract. If the representations
             are included in the insurance policy, they attain the status of a condition or warranty.

                                                                                                                             27
1.3.2 Where a representation is not correct, it amounts to a misrepresentation which may
    be innocent or fraudulent. In all cases, the insurance contract is avoidable at the instance
    of the party who is not at fault. What constitutes misrepresentation is a question of fact.
    Ordinarily, statement of belief or opinion does not amount to misrepresentation if the
    belief or opinion is sincerely held. Half truth may be accurate on the face of it and may
    be false when related to other relevant facts and could avoid an agreement on the
    ground of misrepresentation.

1.3.3 A stipulation in the contract can make the accuracy of a statement as condition for
    the validity of the policy. If the statement is shown to be inaccurate, it is a breach of
    the policy whether the fact is material or not. Insurers effect this by inserting what is
    known as "the basis of the contact clause". A typical example of this clause is as
    follows:

         "I declare that the particulars and statements made by me above are true and
         I agree that they shall be the basis of the contract between me and..."

1.3.4 In law of contract, conditions and warranties are stipulations of distinct characters
    that create different rights and obligations. A condition is a fundamental term of the
    contract, the breach of which entitles the other party to rescind the contract and claim
    for damages. The breach of warranty entitles the other party to claim damages only and
    not to avoid the contract. In marine insurance, it is different. In W & J Lane v. Spratt
    [1970] 2 QB 480,486, Roskill J clarified the position thus

          "...it is well known, particularly in the field of marine insurance law, that the
          word "warranty" is often used when those who use it in truth mean a condition.
          I will therefore, define what I mean in this judgment by a `condition' and a
          `warranty'. By a condition I mean a contractual term of the policy, any breach
          of which by the assured will, in the event of a loss arising, otherwise payable
          under the policy afford underwriters a defence to any claim irrespective of
          whether there is a casual connection between a breach of the contractual term
          and loss. By `warranty' I mean a contractual term of the policy a breach of
          which will not of itself afford a defense to underwriters unless there is a

                                                                                                                   28
          necessary casual link between the breach and the loss which is the subject
          matter of the claim under the policy.

     In the case of Bank of Nova Scotia v Mutual War Risks Association (Bermuda)
     Ltd [1991] 2 WLR 1279. The vessel "The Good Luck" was insured under a policy
     which contained, interalia, an express warranty prohibiting her from entering certain
     declared areas of such extreme danger that it was considered not accepted by the
     insurer that they should cover vessels entering them. In breach of the warranty, the
     vessel sailed into the Arabian Gulf and was struck by a missile which so badly
     damaged her that she became a constructive total loss. The question was whether the
     insurer was automatically discharged from liability by reason of the breach or whether
     it was required to take active steps to rescind the contract as it would have to under
     ordinary principles of the law of contract. Lord Goff held

          "...if a promissory warranty is not complied with, the insurer is discharged
          from liability as from the date of the breach of warranty, for the simple reason
          that fulfillment of the warranty is a condition precedent to the liability or
          further liability of the insurer"

1.3.5 The contract may insist on certain things as fundamental that the assured must
    comply with either before the occurrence of the insured risk or after a loss might have
    been sustained. The former is called "conditions precedent to liability" while the latter
    is called "conditions subsequent to liability". Conditions precedent to liability are
    things that the assured have to do before the policy comes into existence. If the
    condition is not complied with, then, there will be no cover for the loss. Conditions
    subsequent to liability are requirements to be fulfilled after the loss has occurred.
    Where they are not fulfilled the policy could be avoided. The onus of proof of breach
    of a condition precedent or subsequent to liability lies on the insurers.

1.3.6 Warranty is a charge by which the assured undertakes to do a particular thing or
    satisfy a particular condition or affirms or negates the existence of a particular state of
    facts. Warranties may relate to past or present facts (called affirmative warranties) or
    future conduct of the assured (called continuing /promissory warranties. Whereas

                                                                                                                   29
    warranties are part of the written policy, mere representations without more, are outside
    of the written contract.

1.3.7 According to section 34, M.I.A a warranty means a promissory warranty, that is to
    say, a warranty by which the assured undertakes that some particular thing shall or shall
    not be done or that some conditions shall be fulfilled, or whereby he affirms or
    negatives the existence of a particular state of facts. A warranty is a condition which
    shall be exactly complied with, whether it is material to the risk or not. If it is not so
    complied with, then subject to any express provision in the policy, the insurer shall be
    discharged from liability as from the date of breach of warranty, but without prejudice
    to any liability incurred by him before that date.

1.3.8 Whereby reason of a change of circumstance or where compliance with the
    warranty is rendered unlawful by subsequent law, non compliance with the warranty
    may be excused. Where a warranty is however broken, the fact that the breach has been
    remedied and the warranty subsequently complied with before loss shall be no defence
    to the assured unless the breach is waived by the insurer. In Ocean Masters Inc v.
    AGF M.A.T (Alliance AGF MAT Ltd) 2007 NLCA35, the plaintiff vessel enroute to
    recover its crab gear in the water 170 miles off the coast, caught fire and sank 40 miles
    off the coast of Newfoundland. The vessel had insurance policy wherein it was
    expressly stated that the vessel would be operated in compliance with its CSI
    certificate. The vessel's CSI certificate limited the vessel's operation to 120 miles off
    the coast. The trial judge held that the trip was illegal. Allowing the appeal the Court
    of Appeal for Newfoundland held that the trip was not illegal in its entirety but was
    only illegal during the time the vessel was beyond 120 miles. The court gave effect to
    clause of the policy which provided " if any breach of a clause or condition of insurance
    shall occur prior to a loss under this insurance, such breach shall not avoid the
    coverage... unless such breach shall exist at the time of such loss" With respect to
    implied warranty of legality, the court held that when the ship sank, it was not being
    operated illegally and therefore the warranty did not apply.

                                                                                                                   30
1.4 Summary.
      The successful negotiation of the parties results in the contract. The agreed terms of the
      parties constitute the conditions and warranties of the insurance contract. Conditions and
      warranties in the contract constitute the charter of rights and obligations of the assured and
      the insurer in their contractual relationship. Conditions and warranties are fundamental terms
      and the core of marine insurance. These terms may be conditions precedent or conditions
      subsequent to liability. The warranties may be affirmative or promissory. The breach of
      conditions entitles the party who is not at fault to avoid the insurance. Unlike, the general
      law of contract, in marine insurance the breach of warranties gives the party who is not at
      fault the right to avoid the contract.

1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
       1) John Pratt v.Aigaion Insurance Co SA [2008] EWHC 489 Admiralty.
       2) R.H.Brown, Marine Insurance-The Principles (London,Witherby and Co.Ltd,1970)
           p.19.

                                                                                                                            31
MODULE 2 CONTRACTUAL TERMS

Unit 2: Implied Warranty

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Implied Warranty
2.4 Summary
2.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

2.1 Introduction
         Under the MI.A, some warranties are implied in the relationship of the assured and the
         insurer.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the end of this unit, you should know that the breach of certain unexpressed terms can
       impact on the contract because the law has implied these terms into the contract. Where the
       implied terms are not complied with the party who is not at fault can be discharged from any
       liability arising thereby.

2.3 Conditions and Warranties
         2.3.1 By warranty the assured undertakes that some particular things shall or shall not be
             done or that some conditions shall be fulfilled or affirms or negates the existence of a
             particular state of facts. A Warranty may be expressed or implied. Whereas there are
             no implied warranties as to the nationality of a ship, or the sea worthiness of goods in
             the case of policy on goods, there is an implied warranty that the adventure insured
             against is a lawful one. Specifically, section 40, M.I.A. warrants the seaworthiness of
             ship in certain instances. According to this section
                  (1) In a voyage policy, there is an implied warranty that at the commencement
                       of the voyage the ship shall be seaworthy for the purpose of the particular
                       adventure insured.

                                                                                                                             32
         (2) Where the policy attaches while the ship is in port, there is also an implied
              warranty that she shall, at the commencement of the risk, be reasonably fit
              to encounter the ordinary perils of the port.

         (3) Where the policy relates to a voyage which is performed in different stages,
              during which the ship requires different kinds of or further preparation or
              equipment, there is an implied warranty that at the commencement of each
              stage the ship is seaworthy in respect of such preparation or equipment
              for the purpose of that stage.

         (4) A ship is deemed to be seaworthy when she is reasonably fit in all respects
              to encounter the ordinary perils of the seas of the adventure insured.

         (5) In a time policy there is no implied warranty that the ship shall be sea
              worthy at any stage of the adventure, but where, with the privity of the
              assured, the ship is sent to sea in an unseaworthy state, the insurer is not
              liable for any loss attributable to unseaworthiness.

     Where the registration of a vessel has expired, the vessel is not seaworthy-Nimasa v.
     Hensmor Nig Ltd (2015) 5 NWLR, 1452, p.278.

2.3.2 There is an implied condition in the case of voyage policy "at and from" or "from"
    a particular place, that the adventure shall be commenced within a reasonable time. If
    the adventure is not so commenced the insurer may avoid the contract unless the insurer
    waived the condition. Where the place of departure or destination is specified by the
    policy and the ship sails from or to any other place, the insurer shall be entitled to avoid
    the contract as the risk shall not attach. Unless otherwise provided for, when there is a
    change of voyage, the insurer is discharged from liability as from the time of change.

2.3.3 Where a ship in the course of a specifically designated voyage deviates or departs
    from the usual and customary course without lawful excuse, the insurer is discharged
    from liability as from the time of such deviation or departure. It is of no moment that
    the ship regained her route before any loss occurred. Unreasonable delay in prosecuting
    a voyage policy may discharge the insurer from liability.

2.3.4 Deviation or delay may be excused where such is excused in the policy; caused by
    circumstances beyond the control of the master of the ship or his employer; reasonably
    necessary to comply with an express or implied warranty; for the safety of the ship or

                                                                                                                   33
            subject matter insured; for the purpose of saving human life or aiding a ship in distress
            where human life may be in danger; necessary for the purpose of obtaining medical or
            surgical aid for any person on board the ship; caused by the barratious conduct of the
            master or crew, if such is one of the perils insured against. Where and when these
            exceptions cease, the ship shall resume her cause and prosecute her voyage with
            reasonable dispatch.
2.4 Summary
      Warranties in marine insurances may be expressed by the parties or implied by law. The
      implied terms have legal consequences. Certain terms are implied into marine insurance. It
      is an implied term that the ship/goods shall be sea worthy and that the vessel keeps to its
      course. Unless otherwise indicated violation of the implied terms would enable the insurer
      to avoid the contract.
2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
       1) Baris Soyer, Warranties in Marine Insurance, Cavendish Publishing Limited. Great
           Britain, 2001.
       2) See Sections 43,44 and 45, Marine Insurance Act,2004.

                                                                                                                            34
MODULE 2 CONTRACTUAL TERMS

Unit 3: Excess and Average Clauses

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Excess and Average Clauses
3.4 Summary
3.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction.
       Excess Clause and Average Clause are recurring terms in marine insurance contract.

3.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the end of this unit, you should know that liability for losses in marine insurance can be
       spread across the threshold of stakeholders by resort to `Excess' and `Average' clauses.

3.3 Excess and Average Clauses.
         3.3.1 Excess is a set threshold for liability. A policy is stated to be subject to an excess
             when the assured is required to bear any loss up to a fixed amount himself. In this
             instance, he is an insurer to himself up to certain threshold. Thus, in the case of a policy
             subject to N50.000 excess, nothing is recoverable in respect of any loss below this
             figure.

         3.3.2 Average as a term in marine insurance contract means loss or damage. General
             average is a loss falling generally on all interest involved in a maritime venture as
             distinguished from particular average or a loss falling on one particular interest. When
             a policy is made subject to average, the assured becomes his own insurer for the
             difference between the sum insured and the full value of the property at the time of the
             loss.

                                                                                                                             35
                                    SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES

1. In the formation of marine insurance, parties make...............
    a) Promises
    b) Undertakings
    c) Representations
    d) Policies

2. The representation that parties make to each other take the form of
    a) conditions and warranties
    b) offer and acceptance
    c) Different policies.
    d) Agreement and contracts.

3. In marine insurance, all except ...........is correct.
    a) breach of conditions or warranties entitles the insurer to avoid the contract.
    b) The breach of conditions entitles the insured to seek for damages against the insurer.
    c) Breach of warranties like general law of contract does not confer the right to avoid the
         contract.
    d) Conditions and warranties do not need to accord with the form of policy in Schedule 1,
         Marine Insurance Act, 2004.

4. Under the Marine Insurance Act, 2004, unless the parties agree otherwise,

    a) It is implied warranty that the ship shall be sea worthy for the purpose of the particular
         adventure.

    b) It is implied that the ship shall be reasonably fit to encounter the ordinary perils of the port.
    c) It is implied that that the adventure insured against is a lawful one.
    d) All of the above.

5. In Marine Insurance a policy subject to an excess means that

    a) that the insured is his insurer in respect of any sum below the stated excess.
    b) the insurer shall not be liable whatsoever.
    c) the insurer shall be liable to compensate the insured howsoever arising.
    d) All of the above.

                                                                                                                           36
3.4 Summary.1) c.
      The Excess and Average clauses in insurance are concerned with risk distribution. The2) a.
      Excess clause sets limit below which the assured bears his own risk. The Average clause3) a.
      which may be general or particular spreads the risk of a loss among stakeholders.4) d.
5) a.
3.5 References/Further Readings.
       1) R.H.Brown, Marine Insurance-The Principles (London,Witherby and Co.Ltd,1970)
           p.19.
       2) Prof D. Rhidian Thomas, The Modern Law of Marine Insurance, Volume Four, Informa
           Law from Routledge, New York, 2016.

3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

                                                                                                                            37
MODULE 3 MARINE INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES

Unit 1: Intermediaries

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Intermediaries
1.4 Summary
1.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction
         Marine insurance intermediaries facilitate marine insurance contracts. The marine
         insurance market is very complex. Experts with actuarial skills necessarily intermediate
         between stakeholders and the marine insurance market. They are crucial at both (demand
         and supply) ends of the insurance market.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the end of this unit, you should know who the intermediaries are and what role they play.
       You should also know that the engagement of intermediaries creates rights and obligations
       between the intermediaries and those for whom they act.

1.3 Intermediaries
         1.3.1 Ship owners, mortgagees of vessel and cargo owners are the usual purchasers of
             marine insurance policies. The terms of the international contract may determine who
             is to place the policy. A C.I.F (cost, insurance freight) or F.O.B (free on board) may
             compel the consignee or consignor as the case may be to take out an insurance cover
             for the goods. The assured may approach the insurer directly or through an insurance
             intermediary. Insurance brokers, agents, loss adjusters etc are professionals in the
             industry and by the deployment of their expertise play very critical roles in the search,
             placement, calculation and satisfaction of obligations arising from insurance contracts.
             The acts of the intermediaries effectively creates contract between the insured and the
             insurer for which the intermediaries take no benefits.

                                                                                                                             38
1.3.2 Insurance Broker. According to Black's Law Dictionary, a insurance broker is a
    person who, for compensation, brings about or negotiates contracts of insurance as an
    agent for someone else, but not as an officer, salaried employee or licensed agent of an
    insurance company. The insurance broker is a very important professional intermediary
    in the insurance industry. He is the independent intermediary between the insurer and
    the assured and facilitates the placement of the cover and at a later date the settlement
    of claim, He is appointed by the assured and acting as his agent, gives professional
    advice on the nature of cover most suitable and obtain the best terms and conditions for
    the insured. He is entitled to broker's commission. The use of brokers is not obligatory
    under the law but because of the critical roles they play in the highly complex marine
    insurance market, brokers are almost indispensable at every stage of the insurance
    contract. National legislations ensure that they meet minimum standards of competence
    and financial responsibility. Under section 36 Insurance Act, 2003,
     (1) No person shall transact business in Nigeria as an insurance broker unless he
          is duly registered under this Act.
     (2) An application for registration as an insurance broker shall be made to the
          Commission [National Insurance Commission-NAICOM) in the prescribed
          form and accompanied by the prescribed fee and such other documents as may
          be prescribed from time to time.
     (3) If the Commission is satisfied that the applicant-
     (a) has the prescribed qualifications; and
     (b) is a partnership or company with limited liability duly registered under the
          Companied and Allied Matters Act,1990, it shall register the applicant as an
          insurance broker by issuing the applicant with a certificate of registration.
     (4) No firm or company shall be registered under this section unless each partner,
          chief executive and executive director is registered as an insurance broker by
          the Institute.

1.3.3 A person who transacts business as an insurance broker without having been
    registered commits an offence. (Section 36(8) Insurance Act, 2003). The registration is
    renewable every year. The brokerage firm or company is expected to maintain a

                                                                                                                   39
    professional indemnity cover of not less than ten million or fifty percent of its annual
    brokerage income and maintain proper books of accounts.

1.3.4 Brokers are different from insurers' representative or agent who acts on behalf of
    the insurer and may engage in the marketing of insurance policies. To obtain cover at
    the Lloyds of London, Lloyds brokers must be used. Contracts of insurance are placed
    at Lloyds by a broker acting exclusively as agent for the assured. He prepares the slip
    to obtain the cover that the assured requires. He takes the slip in the first instance to an
    underwriter whom he has selected to deal with as leading underwriter; very often one
    with a reputation in the market as an expert in the kind of cover required and whose
    lead is likely to be followed by others in the market. If it is the first policy covering that
    risk in which a particular underwriter has acted as leading underwriter, the broker and
    the leading underwriter would go through the slip together, agree on any amendment
    and fix the premium. The leading underwriter initials the slip for his proportion of the
    cover and the broker then takes the initial slip round the market to other insurers who
    would initial it for such proportion of the cover as each is willing to accept. For practical
    purposes all the negotiations on the terms of the insurance and the rate of premium are
    carried out between the broker and the leading underwriter alone.

1.3.5 Where a policy is effected on behalf of the assured by a broker, the broker is directly
    responsible to the insurer for the premium and the insurer is directly responsible to the
    assured for the amount payable in the event of a loss. The broker may have a lien on
    the policy for money due to him from the insured.

1.3.6 Where a contract of marine insurance is in good faith effected by one person on
    behalf of another, the person on whose behalf it is effected may ratify the contract even
    after he is aware of a loss.

1.3.7 Insurance Agent. It is not uncommon for an insurance company to appoint another
    to act on its behalf especially in helping to market its insurance products. No person
    shall transact business as an insurance agent unless he possesses a certificate of
    proficiency issued in the name of the individual applicant by the Chartered Insurance
                                                                                                                   40
            Institute of Nigeria; is duly appointed by an insurer and licensed under the Act and
            registered by the Commission. An insurer who employs the services of insurance agents
            or anybody to act on its behalf shall maintain a register of their details.

        1.3.8 Where the policy is effected for the assured by an agent, the agent shall disclosed
            to the insurer every material circumstance which is known to him and shall be deemed
            to know every circumstance which in the ordinary course of business he ought to know
            or to have been communicated to him unless such circumstance came to the knowledge
            of the assured too late to be communicated to the agent (Marine Insurance Act, 2004,
            section 21). Every material representation made by the agent acting on behalf of the
            assured during negotiation and before the contract is concluded shall be true. The
            insurer shall be entitled to avoid the contract if they are otherwise (Marine Insurance
            Act, 2004, section 22(1)).

        1.3.9 Loss adjusters work for the insurance companies and their interests while loss
            assessors work for the policy holder. A loss adjuster is a claims specialist appointed by
            an insurance company to investigate a contentious claim it is called upon to pay. They
            are expected to establish the cause of a loss and to determine whether it is covered by
            the policy. They may visit the site of the loss to gather evidence and assess damage and
            possibly discredit and dispute the claim to secure the lowest possible settlement if the
            claim cannot be avoided. The loss assessors on the other hand are appointed by the
            assured to help manage his claim under the insurance policy. With their expertise, they
            help with preparing and presenting successful claim on behalf of their client.

1.4 Summary
      The intermediaries facilitate the contract between the insurer and the assured who are the
      primary parties to the marine insurance contract. They perform distinct but complementary
      roles. Generally, the insurance broker acts for and on behalf of the assured. The insurance
      agent on the other hand is engaged by the insurance company and helps the company market
      its products. The loss adjusters and loss assessors act for and on behalf of their insurer and
      the assured respective at the point of settlement of claims.

                                                                                                                            41
1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
       1) Miao Li, Marine Insurance Broker's Duties and Liabilities, University of Southampton,
           2012.
       2) Bryan A. Garner (2004) Black's Law Dictionary, Thomson West, 8th Edn, p.206
       3) American Airlines Inc v.Hope[1974]2 Lloyds Rep.301,30
       4) The National Insurance Commission is established by the National Insurance
           Commission Act, LFN, 2004
       5) Chartered Insurance Institute of Nigeria is established by the Charted Insurance Institute
           of Nigeria Act, CAP C11, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria, 2004-charged with the
           general duty of determining the standards of knowledge and skills to be attained by
           persons seeking to become registered members of the insurance profession in Nigeria
           and reviewing those standards from time to time as circumstances may permit.

                                                                                                                            42
MODULE 3 MARINE INSURANCE INTERMEDIARIES

Unit 2: Obligations and Rights of Intermediaries

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Obligations and Rights of Intermediaries
2.4 Summary
2.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources
2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction.
       The relationship between the intermediaries and those for whom they act is a legal one
       creating obligations for the parties.

2.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the end of this unit, you should know the obligations and rights of insurance brokers and
       agents. This should enable you advise the parties accordingly.

2.3 Obligations and Rights of Intermediaries
         2.3.1 The relationship between the intermediaries and the insured or assured is sown in
             trust and confidence. It is a fiduciary relationship with ascribed rights and obligations.
             Unless otherwise expressly stated the legal relationship between the broker and the
             insured or between the insurance agent and the insurer is that of principal and agent.
             The position of principal and agent gives rise to particular and onerous duties on the
             part of the agent. The high standards of conduct require from him springs from the
             fiduciary relationship between his employer and himself. His position is confidential1.
             His duties are many. The insurance broker as an agent is bound to perform the task for
             which he as engaged. If for whatever cause he is unable to execute his mandate, he
             must promptly inform his employer. In executing his mandate, the agent is duty bond

1 Aberdeen Railway corporation v. Blaikee brothers (1854)1MARQ 461.
                                                                                                                             43
    to obey all lawful instruction from his principal. The principal's instruction is however
    subject to the custom and usages of the insurance industry. In ROBINSON v
    MOLLETT (1875) LR 7 HL,802 Classy B, stated

              "...By employing a broker who acts upon a particular market, you
              authorized him to make contracts upon all such terms as are usual upon
              the market, otherwise his hands would be tied and he might not be able
              to contract at all. Therefore, as regards all such matters as the time, and
              mode of payment, the time and mode of delivery, the various allowances
              to be made, the mode of adjusting disputes as to quality, and all such
              matters as arise upon the contract made in the market, the principal would
              be bound by the usage..."

2.3.2 The agent owes his employer the duty of care and skill. An agent is bound to exhibit
    reasonable care, skill and judgment in executing his agency. He must bring to bear on
    his task that qualification and finesse required which he possesses to bring his task to
    fruition. What constitutes proper care and skill will differ from case to case. Whatever
    care is used or skill employed must be for the best interest of the principal ultimately.
    As a professional insurance agent holding himself out as possessing a professional
    qualification, he must exhibit such care, skill and diligence as is usual, customary or
    necessary for the proper conduct of the insurance business in which he is employed.

2.3.3 The fiduciary character of the relationship requires the agent to perform his duties
    personally. He cannot delegate the performance of his duties as an agent in a manner
    that will amount to abdication of his responsibilities. According to Thesinger LJ in
    DEBUSHE v ALT [1878]8 Ch.D 286,310;

          As a general rule, no doubt, the maxim delegatus non potest delegare
          applies so as to prevent an agent from establishing the relationship of
          principal and agent between his own principal and a third party; but this
          maxim when analysed merely imports that an agent cannot without
          authority from his principal, devolve upon another obligations to the
          principal which he had himself undertaken to personally fulfill; and that,
          in as much as confidence in the particular person employed is at the root
          of the contract of agency, such an authority cannot be implied as an
          ordinary incidence in the contract.

                                                                                                                   44
     A broker or an insurance agent cannot, without the authority of the insured or insurer
     as the case may be, delegate his duties to his employer.

2.3.4 The agent is duty bound in the discharge of his duties to act in good faith. He must
    avoid any situation of conflict between his personal interest and the interest of his
    principal; in this case the insured or insurer. He must not be in a position to be swayed
    by his interest rather than his duties to this employer. Flowing from the duty of
    confidentiality, the agent cannot make any secret profit or derive any benefit from his
    position in excess of his agreed commission or remuneration. The agent cannot take a
    bribe or secret commission in the form of cash payment, discount or bonuses while
    executing his task.

2.3.5 The agent is duty bound to keep and render proper and accurate account of all
    transactions entered into on behalf of his principal. He is bound to render account of all
    monies and properties received on behalf of the principal. In the event of breach of this
    duty, the agent can be compelled to account.

2.3.6 The agent on his part is entitled to his remuneration as agreed upon between himself
    and the principal. This remuneration may take the form of commission, wages,
    allowances, fees or salary. The agent must have earned the remuneration. He must be
    the direct, immediate and effective cause of the event upon the occurrence of which the
    principal has agreed to pay the agent the remuneration. He must fulfill the conditions,
    if any upon which the remuneration accrues.

2.3.7 The agent is entitled to be indemnified for all liabilities and expenses incurred in
    the execution of his duties. He could exercise a right of lien or set off or by a separate
    action to enforce this duty on the principal. The actions occasioning the liabilities must
    expressly or impliedly fall within the agent's authority.

2.3.8 Primarily, the principal is liable to third parties for contracts entered into on his
    behalf by his agent. This to a large extent is decided by the fact that the agent acted
    within the scope of his authority and whether the principal is named, disclosed or
                                                                                                                   45
            undisclosed in the contract. The rational for this is simply that " the principal put the
            agent in his place to do that class of acts, and he must be answerable for the manner in
            which that agent has conducted himself in doing the business which it was the act of
            his master to place him in"

                                       SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE
                      What rights do you have against your insurance broker and what
                      obligations owed him in a marine insurance contract?
2.4 Summary
      The relationship between the parties is essentially that of principal and agent. The agent
      (broker/insurance agent) is under a duty to perform his contract, obey lawful instruction of
      his employer, personally perform his contract, act with care and skill, loyalty and good faith
      and duty to account. In turn they have rights to remunerations, reimbursements.

2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
       1) Aberdeen Railway corporation v. Blaikee brothers (1854)1MARQ 461.
       2) Otto Hamman v. Sebanjo Anor(1962)2 All NLR,139
       3) Omatayo v Ojikutu [1961] 1 All NLR 901
       4) Spiropolous Co. Ltd v. Nigeria Rubber Co. Ltd (1970) NCLR 94
       5) McPherson v. Watt (1877) 3 AC 254.
       6) Barwick v. English Joint Stock Bank (1867) L.R.2 EXCH.259

2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

                                                                                                                            46
                                       Insured's rights.

                        a. Duty of performance
                          b. Duty of obedience.
                                 c. Care and skill
                      d. Loyalty and good faith

                             Broker's/Agent's Rights

                                a. Remuneration
         b. Indemnify for incurred expenses.
c. Enabling environment to execute agency.
MODULE 4 ASSIGNMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE POLICY

Unit 1: Assignment of Marine Insurance Policy

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Assignment of Marine Insurance Policy
1.4 Summary
1.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources
1.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction.
       Marine Insurance Policy is an asset and can be transferred. The essence of this transfer is to
       enable a third party who was not privy to the formation of the contract acquire rights and
       obligations under the policy.

1.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the end of this unit, you should understand that the marine insurance policy is an asset,
       like all private properties, can be transferred through a legal process called assignment. This
       enable the assignee assume the rights of the assured under the policy.

1.3 Assignment of Marine Insurance Policy.
         1.3.1 The insured has proprietary interest in the policy of cover and like all estates can
             freely transfer his interest in the policy through the process of assignment. Assignment
             of policy of insurance means transferring the policy by the assured who is called the
             "assignor" to a third party called the "assignee" so as to enable the assignee to enforce
             the policy in his own name.

         1.3.2 A policy of insurance is a personal contract and does not run with the subject matter
             of the insurance. If a vessel on which a policy of insurance exists is sold, the sale does
             not automatically transfer the policy to the buyer unless the policy itself is specifically

                                                                                                                             47
    assigned to the buyer. In the absence of some special agreement, the transferee cannot
    call upon the insurer to indemnity him under the policy.

1.3.3 For there to be a valid assignment, the consent of the insurer must be obtained and
    the assignment of the policy must be contemporaneous with the assignment of the
    subject matter. The policy may contain express prohibition against assignment unless
    with the consent of the insurer in which case the insurer has the discretion to give or to
    withhold consent; unless the discretion of the insurer is qualified to the effect that its
    consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Where consent is required, an assignment
    without consent renders the policy avoidable at the instance of the insurer. By giving
    consent the insurer is estopped from denying the validity of the policy. As a matter of
    fact most policies usually contain express provision against assignments.

1.3.4 The assignment of the policy must be made at the same time as the assignment of
    the subject matter, or in pursuance of an agreement which is cotemporaneous with the
    subject matter of the policy. The assignee does not acquire the benefit of the insurance
    cover until the actual transfer of the subject matter. According to section 51 Marine
    Insurance Act,
         (1) A marine policy shall be assignable unless it contains terms expressly
              prohibiting assignment, and a marine policy may be assigned either
              before or after loss.
         (2) Where a marine policy has been assigned so as to pass the beneficial
              interest in such policy, the assignee of the policy shall be entitled to sue
              thereon in his own name; and the defendant shall be entitled to make any
              defence arising out of the contract which he would have been entitled to
              make if the action had been brought in the name of the person by or on
              behalf of whom the policy was effected.

     The process of assignment enables a new party to succeed to the rights and obligations
     of the parties particularly the insured.

                                                                                                                   48
                                    SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISEThis is through the process of assignment. Ensure that the policy has
                       How would you transfer the interest in a marine insurancea clause on the right of the insured to assign. Where consent of the
                       to another person?insurer or notice to the insurer is a condition precedent, such consent
1.4 Summarymust be sought before assignment or notice given before the
      A third party can acquire title to a marine insurance policy if it is transferred to him throughassignment. The assignment may be before or after the loss.
      the process of assignment. Unless prohibited under the policy, a marine insurance is
      assignable. The assignment of a marine insurance policy must be in accordance with the
      provisions of the law.
1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
       1) Vijayalakshmi Venugopal, "Assignment in Insurance Law" [2002]29 Journal of
           Malaysian and Comparative Law,19
1.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

                                                                                                                            49
MODULE 5 OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS

Unit 1: Rights of the Assured

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Rights of the Assured
1.4 Summary
1.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction.
       The relationship of assured and insurer creates obligations for both parties. In so many of
       the instances, the obligations of one constitute the rights of the other. Parties are contractually
       obligated to each other under the policy. The obligations of the insurer are the rights of the
       assured under the contract.

1.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the end of this unit, you should know what rights the assured can assert under a marine
       insurance. The rights of the assured have their foundation in the contract and the law of
       marine insurance.

1.3 Rights of the Assured
         1.3.1 Insurance policy
             The insured has a right to an insurance cover against the risk insured against. Once the
             insured's proposal is accepted, a contract of marine insurance comes into place and the
             insured is entitled ex debito justicea to the protection contemplated by the contract.
             The insurer is under a duty to issue the policy or a slip or memorandum evidencing it.

         1.3.2 Indemnity
             In the event of a loss or damage as contemplated by the contract, the insured is entitled
             to be indemnified as settled in the contract. The quantum of indemnity would depend

                                                                                                                             50
            on the nature of the loss which may be a partial or total loss and whether the policy is
            a valued one or unvalued policy.

        1.3.3 Return of premium.
            The assured, in certain situations may be entitled to the refund of his premium as
            prescribed under section 83-85, Marine Insurance Act, 2004. The circumstances
            include:
              a) Where the premium or proportionate part of it is declared by the Act or the
                  Insurance Policy returnable.
              b) Where the assured has not been put at risk and consequently there has been a total
                  failure of consideration.
              c) Where the assured and the insurer laboured under a common mistake that the
                  subject of insurance was in existence at the time of the contract of insurance where
                  as this is not so.
              d) Where the contract of insurance is repudiated or avoided by the insurer for a
                  breach of warranty. Such a breach of warranty may occur before the completion
                  of the contract, or after the completion of the contract but before loss is incurred.
              e) Where the contract of insurance is avoided either by the insurer or the assured on
                  ground of innocent misrepresentation or non-disclosure not amounting to fraud.
              f) Where the policy of insurance is not valid because of absence of insurable interest.

1.4 Summary
      The relationship is contractual and the insurer has obligations which it must discharge to the
      assured. The insurer is duty bound to issue the insurance policy, indemnify the assured when
      and if the event insured against occurs and where there is total failure of consideration refund
      the premium which the assured paid under the contract.

1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
       1) Prof D. Rhidian Thomas, The Modern Law of Marine Insurance, Volume Four, Informa
           Law from Routledge,New York, 2016.

                                                                                                                            51
MODULE 5 OBLIGATIONS OF PARTIES TO MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS

Unit 2: Rights of the Insurer

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Rights of the Insurer
2.4 Summary
2.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources
2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

2.1 Introduction.
       The obligations of the insured are the rights of the insurer under the contract.

2.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the end of this unit, you should know what rights the insurer can assert under a marine
       insurance.

2.3 Rights of the Insurer
         3.1. Premium. The duty of the assured or his agent to pay the premium and the duty to
                  issue the policy to the assured or his agent are concurrent conditions and the insurer
                  shall not be bound to issue the policy until payment or tender of premium (Section
                  53 Marine Insurance Act, 2004).
         3.2. Disclosure-The insured is duty bound to disclose to the insurer before the contract
                  is concluded every material circumstance which is known to the insured or deemed
                  to be known to him (Section 20 and 21 Marine Insurance Act,2004). Where the
                  insurance is effected by a broker on behalf of the insured, the broker is duty bound
                  to disclose to the insurer every material circumstance which is known or deemed to
                  be known to the agent by the ordinary course of business.
         3.3. Subrogation In the case of total loss and the insurer pays for the total loss, he
                  becomes entitled to take over the interest of the insured in whatever may remain of
                  the subject matter under the salvage principle. In the case of partial loss, the insurer
                                                                                                                             52
                 acquires no title to the subject matter insured but subrogated to all rights and
                 remedies of the insured against third parties who may be liable to the insured
                 (Section 80, Marine Insurance Act,2004).
        3.4. Contribution-Where the assured is over insured by double insurance, each insurer
                 shall be bound, as between himself and the other insurers to contribute rateably to
                 the loss in proportion to the amount for which he is liable under the contract. If any
                 insurer pays more than his proportion of the loss, he shall be entitled to maintain an
                 action for contribution against the other insurers, and be entitled to the like remedies
                 as a surety who has paid more than the proportion of his debt (Section 81, Marine
                 Insurance Act, 2004).
        3.5. Salvage- In the case of total loss and the insurer pays for the total loss, he becomes
                 entitled to take over the interest of the insured in whatever may remain of the
                 subject matter under the salvage principle.
        3.6. Right to avoid. Where the insured failed to disclosed a material circumstance in the
                 formation of a contract, the insurer has a right to avoid the contract (Section 20,
                 Marine Insurance Act,2004). Every material representation made by the assured or
                 his agent to the insurer during the negotiation for the contract and before the
                 contract is concluded shall be true; and if untrue the insurer can avoid the contract
                 (Section 22 Marine Insurance Act, 2004).
        3.7. According to section 87, Marine Insurance Act, 2004, where any right, duty,
                 liability would arise under a contract of marine insurance by implication of law; it
                 may be negative or varied by express agreement or by usage, if the usage is such as
                 to bind both parties to the contract.

                                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE
                           Mention the rights of parties to a marine insurance contract.

2.4 Summary.
      The relationship is contractual and the assured has obligations which it must discharge to the
      insurer. The insurer is entitled to be paid the premium for the coverage, disclosure of material

                                                                                                                            53
      facts on the risk insured, right of subrogation to the rights of the insured and contributionThe insured is entitle to
      where a risk has occurred and have been paid for and to what is left of the subject matter of
      the insurance under the salvage principle. The insurer has a right to avoid the contract wherea. Coverage under the insurance policy
      there is non-disclosure of material circumstances on the subject matter of the insurance.b. Indemnity.
2.5 References/Further Readings.c. Return of premium where there is failure of consideration
       1) Prof D. Rhidian Thomas, The Modern Law of Marine Insurance, Volume Four, Informa
                                              The Insurer is entitled to
           Law from Routledge,New York, 2016.
2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise.                  a. Premium.
     b. Disclosure of every material circumstance of the risk.
                                                                                                                            54c. Subrogation.
                                                     d. Contribution.
                                                           e. Salvage.
                                    f. Right to avoid the contract.
MODULE 6 SETTLEMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS

Unit 1: Preliminary Issues

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Rights of the Insurer
1.4 Summary
1.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction.
       In the event of a loss or damage, necessary steps are taken to ensure that the assured is
       indemnified. This is the essence of the insurance relationship. The need to determine the
       cause of loss or damage and to serve notice to the insurer is important steps towards
       settlement of claims.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the end of this unit, you should know the preliminary considerations towards recovery of
       claims or indemnity under the marine insurance contract. These preliminary issues can be
       the reason for the successful recovery or otherwise under the policy.

1.3 Preliminary Issues
         1.3.1 The relationship between the insured and the subject matter of the insurance must
             be sufficiently close to justified his being paid in the event of its loss or damage. It shall
             be the duty of the assured and his agents, in all cases to take such measures as may be
             reasonable for the purpose of averting or minimizing a loss. The insurer is liable for
             any loss proximately caused by the peril insured against-causa proxima non remota
             spectator. By section 56(1), Marine Insurance Act, 2004, the insurer shall be liable for
             any loss proximately caused by a peril insured against. He shall not be liable for any
             loss which is not proximately caused by a peril insured against.

                                                                                                                             55
1.3.2 If and when a loss or damage insured against occurs, the assured will usually
    request a broker to proceed with the mechanics of the settlement. For complex cargo
    loss claim and for most hull claims, the broker submits the claim to an average adjuster
    who calculates or adjusts the claim according to his professional expertise and in an
    impartial manner. The claim will then be submitted to the claims adjuster of the insurer
    who has the responsibility of determining whether the insurer has any liability under
    the policy to pay the claim or adjust the claim himself if it has not already been adjusted.
    If it has, he will review the adjustment to see if everything is in order and gives his
    approval to settlement of the claim by payment. Upon payment of an indemnity to the
    assured under the policy, the insurer is subrogated to any claims the assured may have
    against any third party who may have caused the loss. This will be in the nature of
    proceedings for compensation or recovery in the name of the assured against third
    parties.

1.3.3 Where a vessel is damaged and such is within the contemplation of the policy, the
    choice of where to repair is an important factor because the standard used to determine
    liability is reasonable cost of repair. In international marine insurance Clause 19,
    Institute Time Clauses: Hull empowers insurer to veto the ship-owners choice of repair
    yard and to take their own tender or require further tenders to be taken for such repair
    work.

1.3.4 Insurance policies placed directly with a foreign insurer may be faced with the
    challenge of conflict of laws as it relates to the issue of jurisdiction in the event of
    disputation. If the foreign insurer has presence within jurisdiction where the insured is,
    litigation may well be commenced within jurisdiction. Where the insurance was
    effected abroad through a broker, the assured may be compelled to institute legal action
    in that foreign country which could be complex and costly for the assured. In such
    instances the assured may concede to a compromise settlement, regardless of the
    legitimacy of his claim. Careful consideration must be given to the inclusion of a
    satisfactory jurisdiction clause in international marine insurance placement. An
    "agreement to be bound" clause in favour of a designated insurer in the case of co-

                                                                                                                   56
            insurance arrangement would lighten the burden for the assured where the co-insurers
            are in different jurisdictions apart from the assured.
1.4 Summary
      Where the event insured against occurs, the obligations of the insurer crystalises after the
      insured has taken the appropriate steps. If the loss or damage insured against is the proximate
      cause of the peril, the insured must put the insurer on notice and request the insurer to make
      good his undertaken.
1.5 References/Further Readings.
       1) The Moonacre (1992) 2 Lloyds Rep 501.
       2) Marine Insurance Act,2004, section 79(4)
       3) The Leyland Case (1918) AC 350.

                                                                                                                            57
MODULE 6 SETTLEMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS

Unit 2: Measure of Indemnity

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Measure of Indemnity
2.4 Summary
2.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources

2.1 Introduction.
       When the liability of the insurer is established, the next important concern is the quantum of
       recovery by the assured. The measure of indemnity depends on the benchmark set by the
       Marine Insurance Act.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
       This unit enables you to see the relationship between the kind of insurance policy taken and
       the extent of recovery in the event of a loss.

    2.3 Measure of Indemnity.
         2.3.1 The measure of indemnity is the sum which the assured can recover in respect of a
             loss on a policy by which he is insured (Section 68, Marine Insurance Act, 2004). The
             loss may be total or partial loss. Total loss may be actual total loss (i.e. sunk or missing
             ship) or constructive total loss (i.e. reasonable abandonment following the occurrence
             of the risk insured against which renders the vessel beyond economic repair and for
             which the insured has given notice to the insurer. Sections 56-64 Marine Insurance Act,
             2004 set out the rules on construction of loss and abandonment.

         2.3.2 Partial loss may be particular average loss or general average loss. Particular
             average is one caused by a peril insured against. A general average loss is one caused
             by or directly consequential on a general average act and includes a general average
             expenditure as well as a general average sacrifice. There is a general average act where
                                                                                                                             58
    an extraordinary sacrifice or expenditure is voluntarily and reasonably made or incurred
    in time of peril for the purpose of preserving the property imperil in the common
    adventure. Where there is a general average loss, the party on whom it falls shall be
    entitled to a rateable contribution, called a general average contribution from the other
    parties interested. Where the insured has incurred a general average expenditure or
    sacrifice he may nonetheless recover from the insurer in respect of the expenditure or
    sacrifice without enforcing his right of contribution against the other parties. Where the
    assured has paid or is liable for any general average contribution, the measure of
    indemnity is the full amount of such contribution if the subject matter is insured for its
    full contributory value (Section 74, Marine insurance Act, 2004). In the absence of
    express stipulation, the insurer shall not be liable for any general average loss or
    contribution where the loss was not incurred for the purpose of avoiding or in
    connection with the avoidance of a peril insured against (Section 67 Marine Insurance
    Act, 2004).

2.3.3 The extent of insurers' liability for loss in the case of unvalued policy is the full
    extent of the insurable value. For valued policy, the insured can recover to the full
    extent of the valued fixed by the policy. In the case of a total loss for a valued policy,
    the measure of indemnity is the sum fixed by the policy. In the case of unvalued policy,
    the measure of indemnity is the insurable value of the subject matter insured (Section
    69, Marine Insurance Act, 2004).

2.3.4 For partial loss of ship, the reasonable cost of repairs less the customary deductions
    but not exceeding the sum insured in respect of any one casualty; the reasonable
    depreciation arising from the unrepaired damage, but not exceeding the reasonable cost
    of repairing such damage (Section 70 Marine Insurance Act, 2004). For partial loss of
    freight, the measure of indemnity is such proportion of the sum fixed by the valued
    policy, or of the insurable value in the case of an unvalued policy, as the proportion of
    freight lost by the insured bears to the whole freight at the risk of the insured under the
    policy. Where the assured has effected an insurance against liabilities to third parties,
    the measure of indemnity is the amount paid or payable by the insured to the third party

                                                                                                                   59
            (Sections 71,72, & 75, Marine Insurance Act, 2004). In Goole and Hull Steam Towing
            Co. Ltd v Ocean Marine Insurance Co. [1927] 29 LIL Rep 242, McKinnon noted
            that "the real question in the case is what is the measure of indemnity that, by the
            convention of the bargain, has been promised to the assured? That may in some cases
            be less than an ideal pecuniary indemnity, in some cases it may be more"
2.4 Summary.
      Once the peril is covered by the marine insurance policy, the obligation of the insurer to
      indemnify the assured crystallizes. Partial or total loss, valued or unvalued policy will
      determine whether the measure of indemnity will be the value insured against or the
      insurable value of the subject matter lost or damaged.
2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
       1) Berkeley v Preserve (1801) 1 East 220

                                                                                                                            60
MODULE 6 SETTLEMENT OF MARINE INSURANCE CONTRACTS

Unit 3: Excluded Losses

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Excluded losses
3.4 Summary
3.5 References for Further Reading/Web Sources
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction
       Certain losses are ordinarily outside the coverage of marine insurance contract.

3.2 Learning Outcomes.
       At the end of this unit, you should know that the Marine Insurance Act 2004 ordinarily
       excluded certain losses from the realm of the insurer's liability.

3.3 Excluded Losses
         3.1. Risks that fall outside the policy are excluded losses. In Midnight Marine Limited
                  v. Aviva Insurance Company of Canada 2019 NLSC 228, the company was
                  engaged in a transport of scrap metal in the Caribbean rolled in rough sea causing
                  a material handler to fall off the barge. The ship had in 2005 and renewed in 2006
                  a commercial general liability insurance policy which excluded losses beyond the
                  territorial limit of Canada and continental USA and an exclusion of coverage while
                  the material handler was waterborne. The plaintiff`s claim for the material handler
                  was denied by the insurer as the loss fell within the exclusion. The court held that
                  the insurer did not have to indemnify the assured for loss as the loss fell within the
                  exclusions in the policy.

                  In Haryet v. Lloyd's Canada 2015 ONSC 853 the insured crash his motor boat
                  into a dock killing himself and injury a passenger. At the time, the insured had a

                                                                                                                             61
         blood/alcohol level of more than 3 times the legal limit. The injured passenger sued
         the insured's estate and the estate sought defence and indemnity coverage from the
         insurer. The insurer refused on the grounds that the policy contained no "duty to
         defend" clause and that there was no coverage for illegal operation of the vessel.
         With respect to the duty to indemnify, the policy provided that the insurer shall be
         liable if the vessel was operated illegally. It is an offence under the criminal code
         to operate a vessel with a blood/alcohol level of more than 0.08. The insured's
         blood/alcohol level was well above that that limit. The Ontario Supreme court held
         that a liability insurer had no duty to defend its insured's when the policy contains
         no such contractual obligation and no duty to indemnify when the injured was
         driving the vessel under the influence of alcohol and therefore illegal.

3.2. The English Marine Insurance Act 1906 provides the framework in relation to
         excluded and included losses. The principle of proximate cause is applied to
         determine the liability of the insurer. The Act states that there are certain situations
         in which the insurer is not liable for the loss which has been insured against. But if
         the loss occurred due to proximate cause, and the willful negligence of the assured
         also contributed in happening of the loss, the insurer will be liable.

3.3. Unless otherwise provided for in the policy, losses occasion by willful misconduct
         of the assured, loss proximately caused by delay, ordinary wear and tear, leakage
         and breakage, inherent vice and nature of the subject matter covered by the policy,
         loss proximately caused by rats or vermin, injury to machinery not proximately
         caused by maritime perils are excluded losses for which the insurer bears no
         responsibility.

3.4. In the case of cargo insurance, risk of loss or damage caused by delay, inherent vice
         or the nature of the subject matter insured are excluded. Risk of loss or damage is
         used in a technical sense to exclude inevitable losses which occur in the shipment
         of certain types of commodities such as percentage loss of weight or volume with
         grains or fluid; what are called normal transit losses or damages.

                               SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES

                      What steps would you take to recover under a marine
                      insurance contract?

                                                                                                                   62
3.4 Summary.
      The insurer does not bear any responsibility for the losses excluded under the Marine
      Insurance Act, 2004. Section 56 (2) Marine Insurance Act,2004 ordinarily excluded losses
      caused by willful misconduct of the assured, delay, wear and tear, nature of the subject
      matter, rats or vermin unless the policy state otherwise.

3.5 References/Further Readings
       1) Robert H. Brown, Witherby Encyclopedic Dictionary of Marine Insurance: Insurance
           Terms and Clauses, Dictionary of Marine, 2003, Witherby & Co. Ltd, ISBN 978-
           1856092227
       2) Rose F.D. Marine Insurance Law and Practice, Lloyd's of London Press. London,2004.
       3) Reference Book of Marine Insurance Clauses, 69thed, Witherby & CO. Ltd., London,
           1997.
       4) http://www.bmla.org.uk.
       5) http://www.1malloyds.com

3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise.

                                                                                                                            63
          a. Determine the proximate cause of the loss.
b. Ensure that the insured has insurable interest in the

                              subject matter of the loss.
  c. Determine the nature of loss (partial or total loss)
                     d. Be mindful of the kind of policy.
                                e. Serve notice of the loss.
f. Engage with the provisions of section 56-64 Marine

  insurance Act,2004 on the measure of indemnity.
