NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
    SCHOOL OF POSTGRADUATE STUDIES

               FACULTY OF LAW

               COURSE CODE: CLL811

   COURSE TITLE: LAW OF INDUSTRIAL AND

               INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY I

                                                                                                             1
     NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

Headquarters
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone,
University Village,
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway,
JABI - ABUJA
URL: www.nou.edu.ng

Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos

Published by
National Open University of Nigeria

Printed
ISBN:

All Rights Reserved

                                                                                                                     2
Course Code:           COURSE INFORMATION
                             CLL811

Course Title:          LAW OF INDUSTRIAL AND
                       INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY I

Credit Unit:           3

Pre-Requisite Course:

Course Status:         C

Semester:                 ONE

Required Study Hours:

Edition:                  2022

                                                3
                            COURSE TEAM

Course Developers/Writers:  Dr Desmond O. Oriakhogba and
                            Dr Ifeoluwa A. Olubiyi

Course Editor:              Dr Ernest O. Ugbejeh

Programme Leader:           Dr Ernest O. Ugbejeh

Programme Coordinator: F.O. ONAMSON, PhD

                                                          4
TABLE OF CONTENTS                      PAGE

Introduction                                                     5
Course Aim
Course Learning Outcomes
Working through this course
Course Materials
Study Units
Textbooks and Reference
Assessment
Tutor Marked Assignment
Final Examination and Grading
Course Score Distribution
Course Overview/Presentation
How to get the most from this course.
Tutors and Tutorials.
Summary
CLL811 ­ LAW OF INDUSTRIAL AND INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY I

COURSE GUIDE

INTRODUCTION
Generally, intellectual property law protects the rights of authors, inventors, creators and
owners of, and entrepreneurs in, certain innovative and creative products. Intellectual property
is broadly divided into copyright (or more loosely referred to as intellectual property in
layman's term) and industrial property, which includes patent, designs and trademarks.

Our discussion in this semester will focus on general introduction to intellectual and industrial
property, the protection of copyright and related rights; and emerging intellectual property
issues, namely protection of traditional knowledge traditional cultural expression and genetic
resources, and some of the recurring issues around digitisation and intellectual property.

Nigerian legislation and cases are the primary focus of discussion. However, reference shall be
made to relevant international treaties and the law from selected foreign jurisdictions to give
the global perspectives and for purposes of comparison.

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE
To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, recommended books, relevant
cases and other materials provided by NOUN. Each unit contains a Self-Assessment Exercise,
and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes. At
the end of the course there is a final examination. The course should take you about 11 weeks
to complete. You will find all the components of the course listed below. You need to make
out time for each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.

COURSE MATERIALS
The major components of the course are.

    a) Course guide.
    b) Study Units.

                                                                                                                     6
    c) Textbooks
    d) Assignment file/Seminar Paper
    e) Presentation schedule.

MODULES AND STUDY UNITS
The discussion in this course is broken down to 11 (eleven) study units that are broadly divided
into FOUR modules as follows ­

MODULE ONE: GENERAL INTODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL AND
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY
Unit 1: Meaning, objective and justification of intellectual and industrial property
Unit 2: International and regional frameworks for intellectual property protection
Unit 3: The institutional framework for intellectual property protection in Nigeria

MODULE TWO: PROTECTION OF COPYRIGHT IN NIGERIA
Unit 1: History of copyright protection in Nigeria
Unit 2: Subsistence of Copyright
Unit 3: Authorship, Ownership and Transfer of Copyright

MODULE THREE: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT OF COPYRIGHT
Unit 1: Administration of Copyright
Unit 2: Copyright Infringement and Enforcement
Unit 3: Exceptions to Copyright

MODULE FOUR: EMERGING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES
Unit 1: Traditional knowledge, traditional cultural expression and genetic resources
Unit 2: Digitization and intellectual property

All these Units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and values, which merit
your attention and thought. Tackle them in separate study periods. You may require several
hours for each.

                                                                                                                     7
We suggest that the Modules be studied one after the other, since they are linked by a common
theme. You will gain more from them if you have first carried out work on the law of contract.
You will then have a clearer picture into which to paint these topics. Subsequent units are
written on the assumption that you have completed previous Units.

Each study unit consists of one week's work and includes specific Learning Outcomes,
directions for study, reading materials and Self-Assessment Exercises (SAE). Together, these
exercises will assist you in achieving the stated Learning Outcomes of the individual units and
of the course.

REFERENCES / FURTHER READING
Certain books have been recommended in the course. You should read them where so directed
before attempting the exercise.

ASSESSMENT
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor Marked Assignments and a
written examination. In doing these assignments you are expected to apply knowledge acquired
during the course. The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file. The
work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
There is a self-assessment exercise at the end for every unit. You are required to attempt all the
assignments. You will be assessed on all of them, but the best three performances will be used
for assessment. The assignments carry 10% each. Extensions will not be granted after the due
date unless under exceptional circumstances.

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING
The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and will carry 70% of the
total course grade. The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self-
assessment exercises and the tutor marked problems you have previously encountered. All
aspects of the course will be assessed. You should use the time between completing the last
unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course. You may find it useful to review
yourself assessment exercises and tutor marked assignments before the examination.

                                                                                                                     8
COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.

Assessment                                       Marks

Assignments 1-4 (the best three of all the Four assignments. Best three marks of the

assignments submitted)                           four counts at 30% of course marks.

Final examination                                70% of overall course score

Total                                            100% of course score.

Course Overview and Presentation Schedule

Module / Unit            Title of Work                               Weeks      Assessment
                                                                               (End of Unit)
                                                                     Activity
                                                                               Assignment 1
Course Guide                                                                   Assignment 2
                                                                               Assignment 3
MODULE 1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO
                                                                               Assignment 4
               INTELLECTUAL AND INDUSTRIAL                                     Assignment 6
                                                                               Assignment 7
               PROPERTY

Unit 1         Meaning, objective and justification of intellectual         1

               and industrial property

Unit 2         International and Regional Frameworks for                    2

               Intellectual Property Protection

Unit 3         The Institutional Framework for Intellectual                 3

               Property Protection in Nigeria

MODULE 2 PROTECTION OF COPYRIGHT AND RELATED

               RIGHTS

Unit 1         History of copyright protection in Nigeria                   4

Unit 2         Subsistence of Copyright                                     4

Unit 3         Authorship, Ownership and Transfer of Copyright              5

MODULE 3       ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF                            6  Assignment 9
               COPYRIGHT IN NIGERIA
    Unit 1     Copyright Infringement and Enforcement
    Unit 2     Exceptions to Copyright
    Unit 3     Administration of Copyright

                                                                                      9
MODULE 4    EMERGING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY               8  Assignment 12
    Unit 1  ISSUES
    Unit 2  Traditional knowledge, traditional cultural
            expression and genetic resources
            Digitization and intellectual property

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE
In distance learning, the study units replace the lecturer. The advantage is that you can read
and work through the study materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suits you best.
Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer. Just as a lecturer might give
you in-class exercise, you study units provide exercises for you to do at appropriate times.
Each of the study units follows the same format. The first item is an introduction to the subject
matter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with other units and the course as a
whole. Next is a set of learning objectives. These objectives let you know what you should be
able to do by the time you have completed the unit. You should use these objectives to guide
your study. When you have finished the unit, you should go back and check whether you have
achieved the objectives. If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly improve your
chances of passing the course.
Self-Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout the units. Working through these tests
will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the
examination. You should do each Self-Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study unit.
Examples are given in the study units. Work through these when you have come to them.

TUTORS AND TUTORIALS
There are 11 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You will be notified of the
dates, times and location of the tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your
tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group. Your tutor will mark and comment on your
assignments. Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter.
Your tutor may help and provide assistance to you during the course. You must send your Tutor
Marked Assignments to your tutor well before the due date. They will be marked by your tutor
and returned to you as soon as possible.

                                                                                                      10
Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if:
      You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
      You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
      You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on
          an assignment or with the grading of an assignment.

You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance to have face to face
contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly. You can raise any
problem encountered in the course of your study. To gain the maximum benefit from course
tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them. You will gain a lot from participating
actively.

                                                                                                                     11
         TABLE OF CONTENT

                                           MODULE/UNIT                                 PAGE
MODULE 1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL AND
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTY

 Unit 1 Meaning, objective, and justification of intellectual and industrial property  13

 Unit 2 International and Regional Frameworks for Intellectual Property Protection     26

 Unit 3 The Institutional Framework for Intellectual Property Protection in Nigeria    38

MODULE 2 PROTECTION OF COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

 Unit 1 History of Copyright Right Protection in Nigeria                               45

 Unit 2 Subsistence of Copyright                                                       51

 Unit 3 Authorship, Ownership and Transfer of Copyright                                72

MODULE 3 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT IN

NIGERIA

 Unit 1 Copyright Infringement and Enforcement                                         83

 Unit 2 Exceptions to Copyright                                                        90

 Unit 3 Administration of Copyright                                                    103

MODULE 4 EMERGING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES

  Unit 1 Traditional knowledge, traditional cultural expressions, and generic resources
                                                                                                                  118

 Unit 2 Digitisation and Intellectual Property                                         129

                                                                                           12
MODULE 1 GENERAL INTRODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL AND INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY

Unit 1: Meaning, objective and justification of intellectual and industrial property

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Meaning, objective, and justification of intellectual and industrial property

        1.3.1 Meaning of intellectual and industrial property
        1.3.2 Objectives of the protection of intellectual property
        1.3.3 Justification of protection of intellectual property
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
1.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 1

1.1 Introduction
      Intellectual property is everywhere. It finds relevance in every facet of society. It plays a
      significant role in medicine and health, entertainment and sports, literature and visual arts,
      broadcasting, business and entrepreneurship, manufacturing and construction. It is also
      important within the climate change discourse, especially in the area of green technology
      and agriculture. Further, it occupies a major part of the conversations around the protection
      of traditional knowledge, traditional cultural expressions and genetic resources.
      Intellectual property has remained in the heart of technological advances, especially in this
      era of digitisation. As such, it continues to be relevant within the digital environment and
      within the conversations around the fourth industrial revolution. Indeed, intellectual
      property has continuously been touted as linked to national and global development
      because of its capacity to empower innovators and creators economically and promote
      societal welfare by making much needed knowledge available to the public.

      Therefore, nations around the world have developed, and continue to develop, legal
      regimes to protect the various forms in which intellectual property manifests. Given the
      broadness of its reach, intellectual property exists in various forms broadly classified into
      copyright and related rights, on the one hand, and industrial property on the other hand.
      Industrial property includes patent, trademarks, industrial designs, geographic indications,

                                                                                                                      13
      and other special forms such as trade secret, domain name and unfair competition.
      Traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions cannot strictly be classified as
      intellectual property. However, as will be shown in due course, legal regimes exist that
      have sought to protect them through the tools offered by intellectual property law or sui
      generis legislation.

      That being said, it is important to note that the main intellectual property laws in Nigeria
      are the Patents and Designs Act, Cap P2, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria, 2004; the
      Trademarks Act, Cap T13, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria, 2004 and the Regulations
      made under it; and the Copyright Act, Cape C28, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria, 2004
      and its regulations. The history of intellectual property law, especially in Nigeria, will be
      discussed when we examine the protection afforded intellectual property under these laws.
      The term intellectual property has been defined in different ways and such definitions flow
      from the philosophical leanings of their authors. Implicit in some of the definitions are the
      objectives of, and justification for, the protection of intellectual property. This unit
      highlights and discusses some key definitions of intellectual property and examines the
      objectives and justificatory theories for its protection. The unit is important to lay the
      foundation for the rest parts of the course.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
      At the end of the study in this unit, you should be able to
        1) Explain the meaning of intellectual property and industrial property
        2) Explain why the law protects intellectual property
        3) Explain the theories that have been developed to justify intellectual property
             protection

1.3 Meaning, objective and justification of intellectual and industrial property
      1.3.1 Meaning of intellectual and industrial property
               There is consensus on the point that intellectual and industrial property (simply,
               intellectual property) ­ intangible or incorporeal property ­ is a right conferred by
               law on human innovators and creators, and even entrepreneurs, to protect the fruits
               or products of their intellect, their innovative and creative efforts and their
               commercial reputation and goodwill. Such rights are conferred by law in order to
               promote creativity, innovation and societal good. In this connection, the right

                                                                                                                      14
enables creators and innovators to prevent access to the products of their intellect
or allow access thereto either freely or for economic gain. The right is not absolute.
Rather, it is limited by time and certain exceptions. This way, the law ensures that
creators and innovators do not exercise their intellectual property to prevent
members of the public unreasonably or unjustifiably from assessing the
knowledge, which springs from their creative and innovative efforts.

Adewopo seems to concur with the above conceptualization of intellectual
property. According to him, "the expression intellectual property is ... taken to
mean the legal rights which may be asserted in respect of the product of the human
intellect. That the sum of a man is his intellect, which he holds as his birth right,
that he is worthy of the product of his labour as a reward and incentive to further
create and innovate for the benefit of the society." Oyewunmi also shares similar
understanding. According to the learned author, "intellectual property may be
defined as the legal rights conferred to those who engage in creative, inventive and
promotion activities which have resulted in original, useful or other beneficial
outputs. Such outcome is classified as a form of property, albeit of the intangible,
incorporeal variety. This means that unlike physical property, it is incapable of
physically owned or possessed and can therefore be simultaneously enjoyed by
different users without being lost to the creator or `owner'".

The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) proffers a broader and more
authoritative definition. According to WIPO,

   "Intellectual property [...] means the legal rights which result from intellectual
   activity in the industrial, scientific, literary and artistic fields. Countries have
   laws to protect intellectual property for two main reasons. One is to give
   statutory expression to the moral and economic rights of creators in their
   creations and the rights of the public in access to those creations. The second is
   to promote, as a deliberate act of Government policy, creativity and the
   dissemination and application of its results and to encourage fair trading which
   would contribute to economic and social development. Generally speaking,
   intellectual property law aims at safeguarding creators and other producers of
   intellectual goods and services by granting them certain time-limited rights to
   control the use made of those productions. Those rights do not apply to the
   physical object in which the creation may be embodied but instead to the
   intellectual creation as such. [...] intellectual property [includes] rights relating
   to: literary, artistic and scientific works, performances of performing artists,

                                                                                                       15
   phonograms and broadcasts, inventions in all fields of human endeavour,
   scientific discoveries, industrial designs, trademarks, service marks and
   commercial names and designations, protection against unfair competition, and
   all other rights resulting from intellectual activity in the industrial, scientific,
   literary or artistic fields."

Terms used in the above definition, such as patent, trademark, copyright, industrial
design and geographical indications require further definition. Patents are
exclusive rights generally granted to last for certain period in respect of an
invention, which is a product or process that offers a new or improved way of doing
something or a novel or improved technical solution to a problem. The right
becomes effective upon registration in the relevant patent registry. Where this is
the case, the owner of the right ­ the patentee ­ is empowered to exclude others
from commercial exploitation of the invention during the validity of the patent.

Industrial designs relate to the visual, aesthetic or ornamental representation of a
product. It does not deal with the functionality of the product, but focuses on its
visuals and aesthetics. An industrial design would usually contain three
dimensional characteristics such as the shape of the product or two-dimensional
qualities such as lines, colours and patterns. Industrial designs are referred to as
such because of their industrial applicability. They are applicable to a broad array
of handicrafts and industrial products including luxury items, jewellery, household
wares and electrical appliances, textile, vehicles, watches, shoes, medical and other
technical instruments, among others. Industrial designs require registration to be
protected and they remain valid only for a particular duration as defined by the
relevant law.

Trademarks are relevant within the context of commerce. They are sings capable
of identifying and distinguishing the goods and services of an individual or
company from those of others in the market. Put differently, trademarks are signs
which help consumers to identify and differentiate an individual's or company's
products from those of others based on the unique qualities and characteristics of
the products which is associated with the mark of that individual or company. In
essence, trademarks capture and represent the goodwill associated with the goods
and services of the individual or company in the marketplace. Trademarks come

                                                                                                       16
into effect upon registration, and they last for a particular period as defined by the
relevant law. When a trademark has been registered, the owner of the mark
becomes empowered to prevent other persons or companies from using similar
marks.

Geographical indications are signs placed on goods to indicate their place of origin.
The protection afforded these signs is based on the premise that, in the eyes of
consumers, the goods possess certain unique qualities and reputation due to that
place of origin. Usually, the signs consist of the name of the place of origin of the
product. According to WIPO, geographical indications are often utilised in respect
of agricultural products, which "typically have qualities that derive from their place
of production and are influenced by specific local geographical factors, such as
climate and soil". However, the deployment of geographical indication is not
limited to agricultural products. They may also relate to certain products with
unique qualities and reputation drawn from the product's place of origin. Common
examples of geographical indications include Champagne (France) for wine,
Tuscany (Italy) for olive oil, and, as proffered by Oyewunmi, Ofada rice and Ijebu
garri (Nigeria), etc. Geographical indications require registration under the relevant
law to be protected. However, unlike patent, industrial design, trademarks and
copyright (discussed below), there is currently no legal framework for the
protection of geographical indications in Nigeria.

Copyright refers to the exclusive rights conferred in respect of creative works, such
as books and other literary works, music, and artistic works on the authors of the
works, usually for a period including the life of the author plus 50 or 70 years from
his/her death. This right encompasses the inalienable moral right, and economic or
entrepreneurial right associated with the work. There are also other rights referred
to as related rights, which are like copyright but often shorter in duration and more
limited than copyright. Related rights refer to the right of musicians, actors and
comedians, etc. (performers) in their performances; the rights of music producers
in their sound recordings; the rights of broadcasting organisations in their television
and radio programs; and (in Nigeria) the right in folklore. The works falling under
copyright protection include, but are by no means limited to novels, poems, novels,
newspapers, computer programs, music, databases, painting, photographs,

                                                                                                       17
        sculpture, technical drawings, architecture, maps, musical compositions, films,
        drawings choreography, plays, etc. Unlike patent, industrial design, trademarks and
        geographical indication, copyright and related rights do not require registration to
        be protection. The right is conferred automatically upon creation of the work

1.3.2 Objectives of the protection of intellectual property
         From the foregoing discussion, it can be deduced that intellectual property serves
         two key objectives: the protection of the private interest of creators and innovators
         by enabling them to gain economic rewards for their innovation and creativity; and
         the protection of public interest in the promotion of science, arts and societal
         welfare by ensuring equitable access to creative and innovative works by the
         public. These key objectives are rooted in international human rights legal
         frameworks such as the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights, 1948
         (UDHR, article 27) and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and
         Cultural Rights, 1966 (ICESCR, article 27).

         Accordingly, these international human rights regimes guarantee to everyone the
         right to the moral and economic interest that flow from the scientific, artistic or
         literary production of which he/she is the author. Intellectual property laws
         promote this right by conferring innovators and creators with limited exclusive
         rights over the products of their innovative and creative endeavours. Also, the
         UDHR and ICESCR guarantee the rights of everyone to participate in the cultural
         life of their society, to enjoy the arts and to share in the scientific advancements
         and its benefits. By this stipulation, the international human rights regimes define
         a collective or communal legal interest for everyone in the advancement of culture,
         art and science and the benefits that accrue therefrom. Intellectual property
         achieves this objective by encouraging investment in innovation and creativity
         through the instrumentality of exclusive rights, and by ensuring the dissemination
         and disclosure of the fruits of the investment in creativity and innovation through
         the use of exceptions and limitations.

         According to Professor Oyewunmi, "the twin objectives of private protection and
         public access appear contradictory, because protection gives rise to exclusion of
         the public from access. However, this is not necessarily so, because in appropriate

                                                                                                                18
         cases, protection of private interest helps to foster a conducive environment for
         creativity, inventive activity, and innovation, which, in the long term, is beneficial
         to the public". While this position may not be faulted, it is argued that the twin key
         objectives of protecting intellectual property will be easily achieved through a legal
         framework that do not only protect private interest but also march such protection
         with open and flexible exceptions and limitations that will ensure proper
         accommodation of the public interest.

1.3.3 Justification of intellectual property
         As society keeps developing both technologically and otherwise, the need to
         protect intellectual property remains fresh because with such rise of technology
         comes novel ways of using products of the intellect that were hitherto not
         foreseeable by lawmakers. There is also the "problem of ubiquity" arising from the
         intangibility of intellectual property. According to Stallberg, intellectual property
         "can be used simultaneously in multiple ways. The content of a book, for example,
         can easily be read, told, copied, and so forth by an unlimited number of people.
         The question therefore arises as to why other people should be legally prevented
         from using a naturally unlimited good [...]?" Thus, the need to justify the legal
         protection of intellectual property becomes imperative.

         Two broad philosophical underpinnings have been commonly projected in
         attempting to justify the protection of intellectual property: moral justification and
         economic justification. Different scholars have categorised these justifications
         differently. Some adopt a justification on the distinction between individualistic
         and collectivistic intellectual property models, while others categorise it on the
         distinction between deontological or consequentialist justification. Whatever the
         categorisation adopted, the theories advanced to justify the protection of
         intellectual property are largely similar. The common categorisation of the
         justification (moral and economic) is adopted here and briefly discussed below.

         1) Moral Justification
              The moral justification for the protection of intellectual property can be further
              broken into the labour and personality theories. The Labour theory is further
              categorised into natural right and reward theories. According to the natural

                                                                                                                19
rights theory, intellectual property is seen as an inalienable right, which a
creator or innovator derives by his/her act of creation or innovation. It is seen
as the consequence of a creator's or innovator's labour. The law only steps in
to reinforce this right by affording protection not as a privilege or some type
of reward, but as an already existing right. According to scholars, the act of
creation or innovation may be conceived as having a right-transferring effect
in the sense that the act could be seen as possessing a formal property, which
enables it to extend the pre-existing right to the intellectual product. Thus, the
action may be interpreted as right-constituting in the sense that intellectual
property is created the moment the act of creation or innovation commenced.
The natural rights theory employed for the justification of intellectual property
protection is widely illustrated by reference to the labour theory of private
ownership of property developed by John Locke. Although his theory was not
directly related to intellectual property, Locke's enunciations as concerned
private property are employed in justifying intellectual property protection
because they fit the notion of natural rights. Flowing from the natural right
theory is the reward theory. Here, innovators or creators are viewed as persons
who, by their creativity or innovation and labour, provide goods that are
socially beneficial to the society and as such, deserve some form of reward.
The reward is conceived, not as incentives to the author for further creation,
but as some form of compensation. The reward is seen as moral entitlement
flowing from the creative or innovative endeavours.

The personality theory owes its origin to the thinking of Hegel. Other
philosophers, like Kant and von Humboldt, have further developed this theory.
The theory conceives an intellectual work as a manifestation of its creator's or
innovator's personal development and its identity. Thus, by vesting ownership
of intellectual property on the creator or innovator, the law is only empowering
him/her to protect his/her identity. Put differently, the theory proceeds on the
premise that the creation of a work or invention establishes a psychological
relation between the creator or inventor and the work or invention. The work
or invention becomes part of the creator's or inventor's personality and should
be considered an integral part of his/her own identity. The theory sees works
or inventions as means through which their makers communicate their

                                                                                                 20
    thoughts to the public and that such thoughts can only be communicated
    authentically by third parties if attribution to the makers remains intact. Thus,
    intellectual property is merely a normative recognition of what already exists,
    namely the exclusive relationship between the creator or inventor and their
    works or invention.

    The moral justification for intellectual property protection has a strong
    influence in the development of author's moral rights under copyright law, for
    instance, and it was most widespread in Europe, particularly countries with
    civil law tradition. Attempts at harmonising copyright law at the global level
    led to the adoption of authors' moral rights in countries with common law
    tradition. Authors moral rights include the attribution or paternity rights, which
    is the right of the author to be identified as such in his/her works; and the
    integrity right, which is the author's right to prevent unauthorised changes of
    his/her work that are prejudicial to his/her honour and reputation. Authors'
    moral rights find expression, for example, in section 12 of the Copyright Act,
    which is discussed in more detail later.

2) Economic justification
    Proponents of the economic justification of intellectual property protection
    hinge their arguments on some key premises. First, intellectual works are seen
    as socially beneficial. They are also regarded as public goods, as opposed to
    private goods, and as such everyone can consume them at the same time and
    at no cost with little or no reduction in their value. Secondly, and flowing from
    their public good nature, it is difficult to exclude people from consuming
    intellectual works, thus resulting in free riding. Thirdly, creators and
    innovators embark on the creative and innovative venture with the view of
    being remunerated thereby. The effect of the free riding phenomenon is that
    members of the public will consume the intellectual works without making
    any payment thereby resulting in a loss of income on the part of creators and
    innovators, hence a disincentive to further create or innovate. The disincentive
    to create has the effect of reducing the amount of intellectual works, as public
    goods available in the market for consumption or to a complete absence. Thus,
    the supply of such goods will not be able to meet or match the ever-increasing

                                                                                                      21
    demand for the goods. This will inevitably lead to distribution conflicts or
    market failure that can be resolved if intellectual works are used in such a way
    as to achieve maximum satisfaction for both creators or innovators and
    members of the public. This is known as efficient allocation of resources.

    Therefore, intellectual property law steps in to bring about the efficient
    allocation of resources by vesting exclusive rights to creators or innovators
    over the fruits of their innovation or creativity. With such rights, creators or
    innovators are able to restrain the use of their works or inventions by members
    of the public and put a price in form of royalties over the use of the works by
    the public. Consequently, creators of the works are remunerated for their
    labour in the intellectual creation and thus incentivised to further create or
    innovate. Intellectual property law resolves the market failure or distribution
    conflict in the market for intellectual works by making it possible for the works
    to be available to the public at a cost, while at the same time providing income
    for creators or innovators as incentive to further create.

    Related to the foregoing philosophical underpinning is the Jeremy Bentham's
    utilitarian theory, which in the context of intellectual property connotes a need
    for lawmakers and policy formulators to strike an optimal balance between, on
    one hand, the power of exclusive rights to stimulate the creation of inventions
    and works of art and, on the other hand, the partially offsetting tendency of
    such rights to curtail widespread public enjoyment of those creations and
    inventions in such a way as to ensure the greatest happiness of the greatest
    number.

3) Development theory
    It should be noted that the justification for intellectual property protection does
    not rest on each of the above-mentioned philosophy standing alone. Instead,
    intellectual property protection can be properly justified through a unification
    of the philosophical foundations discussed so far. Put differently, intellectual
    property protection is not just recognition of moral or economic rights alone.
    Rather, it is recognition of both. Indeed, modern theories for the justification

                                                                                                      22
of the protection of intellectual property continue to spring forth from the
established philosophical underpinnings discussed above.

For instance, there is the development, or what Fisher refers to as the social
planning theory, which views intellectual property as not an end in itself, but
as a means to social, technological and national development. This theory is
important especially from a developing country's perspective as it is useful to
gauge the impact of intellectual property protection on the society generally
and formulate intellectual property laws in a manner that will ensure that
protection leads to the desired development. Further, the development or social
planning theory is rooted in the proposition that property rights in general ­
and intellectual property in particular ­ can and should be shaped to help foster
the achievement of a just and attractive culture of innovation and creativity.

The development theory has greatly shaped law and policy thinking at the
global level, especially within the framework of the WIPO where the
Development Agenda is now firm established as part of its work. Initiated by
the thinking of countries from the global South, especially Argentina and
Brazil, the WIPO Development Agenda was adopted in 2007 with forty-five
recommendations grouped into six key clusters. The first cluster requires
WIPO's technical assistance to be transparent, driven by demand and focused
on development. The second cluster seeks to position WIPO's intellectual
property normative formulation to result balanced and inclusive outcomes. It
requires that such rule making activities be supportive of the development
objectives as encapsulated within the United Nations (UN) system, inclusive,
and driven by member state. The third cluster requires collaboration and
cooperation among research and scientific institutions in developed and
developing countries for the dissemination of information and technology
transfer. The fourth cluster seeks to enhance the capacity of WIPO to
undertake objective assessment of the impact of its activities on development.
The fifth cluster focuses on WIPO's mandate, its governance structure, and its
interaction with other intergovernmental organisations and nongovernmental
organisations. The sixth cluster seeks to position WIPO's approach to

                                                                                                 23
                    intellectual property enforcement to be in the context of broader societal
                    interests.

                    It is important to note that the WIPO Development Agenda was adopted as a
                    non-binding international instrument (soft law) to facilitate the rethinking of
                    intellectual property globally. Despite its soft law nature, the Development
                    Agenda has kindled the recalibration and appropriate use of the intellectual
                    property system as a means to national development. The Development
                    Agenda continues to influence intellectual property law making and reform by
                    countries in the global south and serves as the basis for their engagement in
                    trade negotiations involving intellectual property with countries from the
                    global north and among themselves.

                                            SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE ­ 1

                       Intellectual and industrial property are private rights with no significance to
                       the public. As such, they should not be protected by law. Do you agree?

1.4 Summary
      We have explained the meaning of intellectual and industrial property such as patent,
      trademarks, copyright, industrial designs, and geographical indications. We have also
      discussed the objectives of the protection of intellectual and industrial property, which is
      the provision of some form of reward for innovators and creators and the promotion of
      societal welfare. We explained the moral, economic, and other emerging theories that
      justify the protection of intellectual property both from a global and national perspectives.

1.5 References/Further Readings
       1) Adebambo Adewopo, According to Intellectual Property: A Pro-Development
           Vision of the Law and the Nigerian Intellectual Property Law and Policy Reform in
           the Knowledge Era (NIALS, 2012)
       2) Adejoke Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)

                                                                                                                      24
3) FO Babafemi, Intellectual Property: The Law and Practice of Copyright,
    Trademarks, Patents and Industrial Designs in Nigeria (Justinian Books, 2007)

4) G Dutfield and U Suthersanen, Dutfield and Suthersanen on Global Intellectual
    Property Law 2nd ed. (Edward Edgar, 2020)

5) CG Stallberg `Towards a new paradigm in justifying copyright: an universalistic-
    transcendental approach' (2007) 18(2) FIPMELJ 333-381,
    https://ir.lawnet.fordham.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1399&context=iplj

6) Charlene Musiza `The Development Agenda: Rethinking the IP System', http://ip-
    unit.org/2019/the-development-agenda-rethinking-the-ip-system/#more-2348

7) HM Spector `An outline of a theory justifying intellectual and industrial property
    rights' (1989) 8 EIPR 270.

8) LC Becker `Deserving to own intellectual property' (1993) 68(2) CLR 609-629,
    https://scholarship.kentlaw.iit.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=2887&context=cklaw
    review

9) J Hughes `The philosophy of intellectual property' (1988) 77 GLJ 287,
    https://cyber.harvard.edu/IPCoop/88hugh.html

10) W Fisher `Theories of intellectual Property',
    https://cyber.harvard.edu/people/tfisher/iptheory.pdf

11) WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook (WIPO, 2004),
    https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/489/wipo_pub_489.pdf

12) WIPO Development Agenda 2007,
    https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/general/1015/wipo_pub_l1015.pdf

13) William Cornish and David Llewellyn Intellectual Property Law 6th ed. (Sweet &
    Maxwell, 2007)

14) WIPO `What is Intellectual Property',
    https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/450/wipo_pub_450.pdf

                                                                                                               25
MODULE 1 GENERAL INTODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL AND INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY

Unit 2: International and Regional Frameworks for Intellectual Property Protection

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Global Intellectual Property Institutions

       2.3.1 WIPO
       2.3.2 WTO
2.4 Regional Intellectual Property Institutions
       2.4.1 ARIPO
       2.4.2 OAPI
       2.4.3 PAIPO
2.5 Summary
2.6 References for Further Reading

2.1 Introduction
       Global and regional mechanisms exist for the protection and development of intellectual
       property. These mechanisms help to create a convergence between the territoriality and
       national treatment principles on intellectual property protection. The territoriality
       principle means that intellectual property is protected only to the extent as defined by the
       relevant national law. For instance, one can only claim intellectual property right if such
       right is protected under Nigerian law. The principle of national treatment complements
       the territoriality rule. The principle of national treatment means that a foreign copyright
       owner is required to be accorded equal protection as those enjoyed by citizens of the
       country in question. The global and regional mechanisms achieve this convergence by
       adopting harmonisation or unification approach. Harmonization is an option that respects
       the particularities of the legal systems of member states of an international organisation
       in the sense that its core approach is the establishment of minimum standards for
       intellectual property legislation, while unification aims to eliminate the differences in the
       laws of member states by replacing them with a unique and identical provision for all
       states.

                                                                                                                     26
      The WIPO is the main global body responsible for formulating international normative
      frameworks for intellectual property. However, in terms of the Agreement on the Trade
      Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, 1994 (TRIPs Agreement), the World
      Trade Organization (WTO) undertake some normative role concerning intellectual
      property at the global level. The World Health Organization (WHO) and other UN
      specialised agencies, such as the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
      Organization (UNESCO) also carry out some function that bears relevance within the
      context of intellectual property, especially in relation to access to medicines and health
      technologies (WHO) and protection of tangible and intangible heritage (UNESCO).
      Nigeria is a member of these organisations. Nonetheless, our focus here will be on the
      WIPO and WTO, which are briefly discussed below.

      At the regional level, there exist the African Regional Intellectual Property Organisation
      (ARIPO), made up mainly by English speaking African countries and African
      Intellectual Property Organization (known by its French acronym OAPI ­ Organization
      Africaine De La Propriete), composed of the French speaking parts of Africa. Nigeria is
      not a member of any of them. It only has observer status in ARIPO. The Pan-African
      Intellectual Property organisation (PAIPO) is currently being proposed. But it is
      important to also look at its functions as stipulated in the enabling instrument. Thus, focus
      will be on ARIPO, OAPI (the two-active regional intellectual property institutions) and
      the proposed PAIPO, which are briefly discussed below. For purpose of information, it
      is important to note that negotiations are underway for an intellectual property protocol
      under the agreement for African Continental Free Trade Area (AfCFTA). From existing
      studies, the protocol is expected to contain high-level intellectual property principles that
      will bear relevance on trade in goods and services within the African free trade area.

2.2 Learning outcomes
      At the end of the study of this unit, you should be able to
       1. identify key global and regional intellectual property institutions
       2. explain the roles of the key global and regional intellectual property institutions
       3. explain the approaches adopted by the key global and regional institutions in
           carrying out their intellectual property normative standard setting.

                                                                                                                    27
2.3 Global Intellectual Property Institutions
       2.3.1 World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO)
             WIPO is a specialised organ of the United Nations (UN). All members states of the
             UN are entitled to be members of WIPO, although WIPO membership is not
             limited to UN members. WIPO currently has 192 members, including Nigeria. It
             was established in 1970 the year in which the treaty establishing it came into force.
             WIPO was created by the Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property
             Organisation (WIPO Convention), which was signed in Stockholm in 1967.
             WIPO's headquarter is in Geneva, Switzerland, but it has a number of national
             offices, including in Abuja, Nigeria. WIPO is the successor to the United
             International Bureaux for the Protection of Intellectual Property, which was known
             by its French acronym (BIRPI - Bureaux Internationaux Réunis pour la Protection
             de la Propriété Intellectuelle). BIRPI came into being in 1893 as the single
             institution saddled with the task of administering the Berne Convention for the
             Protection of Literary and Artistic Works of 1886 (Berne Convention) and the Paris
             Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property of 1883 (Paris Convention).

             WIPO helps promote intergovernmental cooperation in the administration of
             intellectual property. In this connection, it has as its mission, the promotion of "the
             creation, dissemination, use and protection of works of the human mind for the
             economic, cultural and social progress of all mankind" through international
             cooperation; and to "contribute to a balance between the stimulation of creativity
             worldwide, by sufficiently protecting the moral and material interests of creators
             on the one hand, and providing access to the socio-economic and cultural benefits
             of such creativity worldwide on the other". To these ends, WIPO carries out several
             functions, which includes serving as a platform for member states to develop,
             establish and harmonise rules and practice relating to the protection of intellectual
             property. It operates a global registration system for industrial designs, trademarks
             and geographical indication, and a global filing system for patents. Through its
             various training and outreach programs, and legal and technical assistance, and
             information sharing, WIPO assists both developed and developing countries in the
             formulation and reform of their national intellectual property systems.

                                                                                                                    28
      WIPO currently administers 26 treaties, which includes the WIPO Convention, the
      Berne Convention, the Paris Convention, the WIPO Copyright Treaty 1996, the
      WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 1996, The Beijing Treaty on Audio
      Visual Performances 2012, the Patent Cooperation Treaty 1970, the Lisbon
      Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International
      Registration 1958, the Hague Agreement Concerning the International Registration
      of Industrial Designs 1925, the Trademark Law Treaty 1994, the Singapore Treaty
      on the Law of Trademarks 2006, Patent Law Treaty, 2000, Nice Agreement
      Concerning the International Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes
      of the Registration of Marks 1957, and the Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access
      to Published Works for Persons Who Are Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise
      Print Disabled 2013, among others.

2.3.2 World Trade Organisation (WTO)
      The WTO was established on 1 January 1995, under the Agreement Establishing
      the World Trade Organisation 1994 (WTO Agreement), as a culmination of the
      Uruguay Round of negotiations that took place between 1986 and 1994. Its
      headquarters is in Geneva, Switzerland and it currently has over 160 member states,
      including Nigeria. The WTO was conceived and established as the global body
      concerned with global trade a global system of trade rules. Thus, it is the global
      forum for the negotiation of trade agreements, the settling of trade disputes between
      its members and for supporting the needs of developing countries.

      Recognising the significant links between intellectual property and trade, the
      TRIPs Agreement, which was also negotiated during the 1986-94 Uruguay Round,
      was included as an annex to the WTO agreement. It is the premier agreement
      introducing intellectual property principles into the system of multilateral trade.
      The TRIPS Agreement is meant to ease trade in creativity and innovation, aid the
      resolution of trade disputes among/between member states over intellectual
      property, and to afford member states the space to pursue and achieve their
      domestic goals concerning intellectual property. Indeed, the TRIPS Agreement
      assures member states the latitude to maintain the requisite balance between the
      long-term benefits of providing incentives for innovation and the creativity and the
      possible short-term costs of limiting access to intellectual creation. This is made

                                                                                                             29
possible through the minimum standards set by the TRIPS Agreement for the
protection of intellectual property and the in-built flexibilities that enable the
provision of limitations, exceptions and exclusions to intellectual property. The
WTO's dispute settlement mechanism is deployed to resolve trade disputes relating
to the application of the TRIPS Agreement. Overall, the TRIPs Agreement deal
with five broad issues, namely:

    1) the general provisions and basic rules of the multilateral trading system
         applicable to international intellectual property;

    2) the minimum standards for the protection of intellectual property by
         member states;

    3) the intellectual property rights enforcement procedures that member states
         should provide;

    4) intellectual property dispute settlement mechanisms between member
         states; and

    5) special transitional arrangements for the implementation of TRIPs
         Agreement provisions.

The TRIPS Council created under the WTO Agreement is the main institution
saddled with responsibility to administer the TRIPS Agreement. The Council,
which serves as a forum for discussion between member states, monitors the
operation of the TRIPS Agreement. In the performance of its duties, the Council is
empowered to cooperate with the WIPO and other international organisations
focusing on intellectual property issues. In terms of article 3 of the Agreement
between the WIPO and the WTO 1995, the cooperation with WIPO covers
notifications of laws, technical assistance and implementation of the TRIPS
obligations that flow from Article 6ter of the Paris Convention. The WTO
cooperates with other international bodies with regards to the organisation of
training activities, symposia and other events on intellectual property and trade and
on the relationship of these issues to other policy dimensions, such as climate
change and public health.

                                                                                                       30
2.4 Regional Intellectual Property Institutions
      2.4.1 African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO)
             Midwifed by the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa (UNECA) and
             WIPO, the African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO) was
             established by the Lusaka Agreement which was adopted on 9 December 1976 but
             came into force on 15 January 1978. ARIPO was originally conceived as English-
             Speaking African Regional Industrial Property Organization (ESARIPO) because
             its formation was pushed by some English-speaking African countries. However,
             to position the organisation as an institution open to all African countries, its
             original name (ESARIPO) was changed to the African Regional Industrial Property
             Organisation through an amendment of the Lusaka Agreement in December 1985.
             This name gives the impression that copyright and related rights does not fall
             within the purview of the organisation. However, to change this impression, the
             name was further changed in 2003 by replacing "Industrial" with "Intellectual",
             thus giving rise to the current name. Despite the 1985 name change, the
             organization still has the outlook of a body for English-speaking African Countries
             because as stated above, its membership is composed of English-speaking African
             states. The members include, Botswana, The Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho,
             Malawi, Mozambique, Rwanda, Namibia, Sierra Leone, Somalia, Sudan,
             eSwathini (formerly, Swaziland), Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
             Nigeria and South Africa have observer status. ARIPO's headquarters is in Harare,
             Zimbabwe.

             The ARIPO was created out of the desire of its members to effectively and
             continuously exchange information, harmonise and coordinate their laws and
             activities relating to intellectual property matters. In essence, unlike OAPI
             discussed below, ARIPO seeks to ensure harmonisation of its members' laws and
             practices on intellectual property. To this end, in terms of article III of the Lusaka
             Agreement, ARIPO strives to achieve the following objectives:

                1) to promote the harmonization and development of the intellectual property
                    laws, and matters related thereto, appropriate to the needs of its members and
                    of the region as a whole;

                2) to foster the establishment of a close relationship between its members in
                    matters relating to intellectual property;

                                                                                                                    31
  3) to establish such common services or organs as may be necessary or desirable
       for the co-ordination, harmonization and development of the intellectual
       property activities affecting its members;

  4) to establish schemes for the training of staff in the administration of
       intellectual property laws;

  5) to organize conferences, seminars and other meetings on intellectual property
       matters;

  6) to promote the exchange of ideas and experience, research and studies
       relating to intellectual property matters;

  7) to promote and evolve a common view and approach of its members on
       intellectual property matters;

  8) to assist its members, as appropriate, in the acquisition and development of
       technology relating to intellectual property matters;

  9) to promote, in its members, the development of copyright and related rights
       and ensure that copyright and related rights contribute to the economic, social
       and cultural development of members and of the region as a whole; and

  10) to do all such other things as may be necessary or desirable for the
       achievement of these objectives.

To carry out its objectives, ARIPO operates through the Council of Ministers,
Administrative Council, Board of Appeal and the Secretariat, which are its main
organs. It has also adopted specific protocols to the Lusaka Agreement to address
different aspects of intellectual property. The protocols are the Harare Protocol on
Patents and Industrial Designs 1982, the Banjul Protocol on Marks 1993, the
Swakopmund Protocol on the Protection of Traditional Knowledge and
Expressions of Folklore 2010, and the Arusha Protocol for the Protection of New
Varieties of Plants 2015. Although ARIPO has no protocol on copyright and related
rights currently, it has published survey reports, guidelines, comparative studies
and model law on the subject. These include: ARIPO Guidelines for
Ratification/Accession and Domestication of International Instruments on
Copyright and Related Rights 2019; ARIPO Model Law on Copyright and Related
Rights 2019; Survey on the status of Collective Management Organizations in
ARIPO Member States 2015; ARIPO Guidelines for the Domestication of the
Marrakesh Treaty 2016; Consolidated Comparative Study on Copyright Laws of

                                                                                                       32
       ARIPO Member States and their Adherence to International Instruments on
       Copyright and Related Rights 2018; and the Copyright Awareness Raising Guide
       for ARIPO member states.

       In addition to the foregoing, ARIPO runs an academy, which functions to promote
       the understanding and development of intellectual property system in the member
       states and Africa as a whole; to train intellectual property experts and promote the
       development of human resources in the field of intellectual property; to conduct
       research and make available information on intellectual property for the general
       public; and to foster partnerships and cooperation with other intellectual property
       institutions worldwide. In this connection, the academy conducts short term
       courses and Masters in intellectual property (MIP) programs in cooperation with
       WIPO, and partner Universities in ARIPO member states.

2.4.2 African Intellectual Property Organization (OAPI)
       The African Intellectual Property Organization (known by its French acronym
       OAPI ­ Organization Africaine De La Propriete) was originally referred to as the
       African and Malagasy Office of Industrial Property (OAMPI ­ acronym for the
       French name: l' Office Africaine et Malgache de la Propriete Industrielle) in terms
       of the September 1962 Libreville Agreement signed by twelve (12) Heads of State
       and Government from the Francophone Africa. The Libreville Agreement was
       revised by the Bangui Agreement of 2 March 1997, which led to what is now
       known as OAPI. As stated above, OAIP's membership is composed majorly of
       French speaking African countries, which include Burkina Faso, Cameroon,
       Central African Republic, Benin Republic, Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea,
       Gabon, Guinea Bissau, Ivory Coast, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal and Togo.

       In terms of the Bangui Agreement, OAPI's mission is to promote the development
       of member states through, in particular, the effective protection of intellectual
       property and related rights and to provide training in intellectual property. In this
       connection, OAPI pursues major objectives, which include the implementation and
       application of a common administrative procedure deriving from a uniform system
       for the protection of industrial property, the provision of international agreements
       in the field of industrial property to be acceded by member states, and the provision

                                                                                                              33
       of services related to industrial property. In essence, OAPI strives towards
       unification of intellectual property laws amongst its member states. Thus, OAPI
       runs a common industrial property office which is located in Yaounde, Cameroon
       and the Bangui Agreement applies directly in each member states.

       The Bangui Agreement was later revised in February 1999, with the revision
       coming into force on 28 February 2002. The revision was meant to strengthen
       creativity and the protection of intellectual property rights to secure investment,
       facilitate the transfer of technology and thus contribute to the economic growth of
       member States. To these ends, it made the provision of the Bangui Agreement
       compatible with the requirements of intellectual property treaties, such as the
       TRIPS Agreement, to which its member states are parties. By this revision, issues
       relating to copyright and related rights, plant varieties, layout-designs of integrated
       circuits came within the purview of OAPI, which was initially focused on industrial
       property only. Further, the revision has the implication of waiver of the right to
       delayed implementation of the TRIPS Agreement (contained in article 66 thereof)
       by least developed countries (LDCs). The revision also simplified the procedures
       for the granting of licenses.

2.4.3 PAIPO
       The justification for the proposed PAIPO is captured in the following statement by
       the African Union's (AU) African Ministerial Council on Science and Technology
       (AMCOST) in 2006:
          "The rationale for creating an Africa-wide institution stems from the
          realization that Africa needs a mechanism to facilitate far-reaching changes
          in the arena of intellectual property. However, such revolutionary reforms
          cannot be effected through existing regional arrangements that are currently
          underpinned by geographical limitations and lack of continental
          inclusiveness. It would thus be necessary to establish new decision-making
          machinery that would engage the participation of all member states."

       Based on the forgoing, the AU decided at its general meeting of January 2007 to
       establish PAIPO and therefore mandated the AU Scientific, Technical and
       Research Commission (AU-STRC) to come up with a draft statute for the creation
       of PAIPO which was placed before AMCOST during its fourth conference held in

                                                                                                              34
Cairo, Egypt in March 2010. At that conference, AMCOST created a panel of
intellectual property experts to evaluate and thoroughly consider the draft statute
and submit same to its fifth conference which held in Congo Brazzaville around
November 2012. The draft was further considered at the extra ordinary session of
AMCOST held in Congo Brazzaville from 16 to 18 April 2014 and a final draft
statute for the establishment of PAIPO was framed. The draft statute was noted by
the AU at the twenty-third ordinary session of its General Assembly held in
Malabo, Equatorial Guinea on 26 and 27 June 2014, wherein Tunisia's offer to host
the headquarters and Secretariat of the proposed PAIPO was endorsed. The AU
further requested its Commission to submit the draft statute to the Specialized
Technical Committee on Justice and Legal Affairs (AU- STCJLA) for
consideration and appropriate recommendations. The statute was eventually
adopted at the twenty-sixth ordinary session of the AU assembly in January 2016.
However, it has not come into force yet. It will come into force thirty days after the
deposition of the fifteenth instrument of ratification/accession. So far, only six
countries (Tunisia, Sierra Leone, Guinea, Ghana, Comoros and Chad) have signed
the statute and none has either ratified or acceded it.

Upon coming into force, PAIPO will operate as a specialized agency of the AU
saddled with intellectual property and related emerging issues in Africa and all AU
member states shall be entitled to become its members. Thus, it will have the core
mandate to promoting the effective use of the intellectual property system as a tool
for the economic, cultural. Social and technological development of Africa; and
the setting of intellectual property normative standards that are reflective of the
needs of the AU, member states, the existing regional economic communities
(RECs), ARIPO and OAPI. To this end, PAIPO will undertake specific functions
which include:

    1) to harmonise intellectual property standards that reflect the needs of the
         AU, member states, RECs, ARIPO and OAPI;

    2) to facilitate the harmonisation of national legislations and regional treaties
         with the continental intellectual property standards;

    3) to facilitate the use of intellectual property for the promotion of innovation
         and creativity in Africa;

                                                                                                       35
    4) upon request, to assist member states in formulating polices and addressing
         current and emerging intellectual property issues;

    5) to initiate and facilitate strategies that will promote and develop the African
         intellectual property system;

    6) to strengthen existing regional organisations or such other organisations as
         may be necessary;

    7) to strengthen existing collective management organisations and assist
         members in the establishment of such organisations where none exists in
         the field of copyright;

    8) to lead the African negotiation on international intellectual property issues
         and ensure Africa maintains a common position; and

    9) to support the establishment of continental databases on genetic resources,
         traditional knowledge, and traditional cultural expressions in order for
         member to derive regular and maximum benefits.

Other specific functions of the proposed PAIPO includes facilitation of information
sharing among members and capacity building in the areas of enforcement,
commercialisation, and management of intellectual property in Africa. To operate
smoothly, the proposed PAIPO will be composed of the Conference of State
Parties, Council of Ministers, the Secretariat and Board of Appeal, which shall be
its organs. It is also mandated to establish and maintain working relationships with
any intergovernmental, international, regional or national institution that may assist
it in achieving its objectives.

                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 2

   What are the main approaches adopted by international intellectual property
   institutions in carry out their major functions? Explain with key examples.

                                                                                                       36
2.5 Summary
      We have identified and examined the role and normative setting approach of key global
      and regional intellectual property institutions. The global institutions include WIPO and
      WTO, while the regional institutions discussed are ARIPO, OAPI and the proposed
      PAIPO. Importantly, we explained the two major approaches to intellectual property
      norm settings, which are harmonization and unification. While Nigeria is a member of
      WIPO and WTO, it has observer status in ARIPO and does not belong to OAPI. PAIPO
      is not yet in operation as its enabling Statute has not come into force. Nigeria has not
      ratified the PAIPO Statute yet.

2.6 References/Further readings/Web Sources

1) Adejoke O. Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)

2) WIPO Intellectual Property Handbook (WIPO, 2004),

https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/489/wipo_pub_489.pdf

3) WIPO           `What             is       Intellectual  Property',

https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/intproperty/450/wipo_pub_450.pdf

4) ARIPO: who we are & what we do (2016), https://www.aripo.org/wp-

content/uploads/2018/12/ARIPO_Who_We_Are__What_We_Do_1-1.pdf

5) ES Nwauche, `An Evaluation of the African Regional Intellectual Property Right

Systems' (2005) 6(1) Journal of World IP, 101 ­ 138

6) CB Ncube, Intellectual Property Policy, Law and Administration in Africa:

Exploring Continental and Sub-Regional Cooperation' (Routledge, 2016)

7) Adebambo Adewopo, `Trademark systems in Africa: a proposal for the

harmonisation of the ARIPO and the OAPI agreements on marks' (2003) 6 Journal

of World IP, 433

8) Anthony Taubman, et al (eds), A Handbook on the WTO TRIPS Agreement

(Cambridge University Press, 2012)

9) Adebambo Adewopo, `The global intellectual property system and sub-Saharan

Africa: A prognostic reflection' (2002) 33(4) The University of Toledo Law Review,

749­771

10) G Dutfield and U Suthersanen, Dutfield and Suthersanen on Global Intellectual

Property Law 2nd ed. (Edward Edgar, 2020)

                                                                                                 37
11) GD Graff and PG Pardey, `Inventions and patenting in Africa: Empirical trends

from1970 to 2010' (2020) 23 Journal World IP, 40­64,

https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/jwip.12139

12) UNCTAD, Training Module on the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of

Intellectual  Property  Rights  (TRIPS)                     (Geneva,  2010),

https://unctad.org/en/Docs/ditctncd20083_en.pdf

                                                                                   38
MODULE 1 GENERAL INTODUCTION TO INTELLECTUAL AND INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTY

Unit 3: The Institutional Framework for Intellectual Property Protection in Nigeria

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 The Institutional Framework for Intellectual Property Protection in Nigeria

      3.3.1 Federal Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (FCCPC)
      3.3.2 National Office of the Technology Acquisition and Protection (NOTAP)
      3.3.3 National Information and Technology Development Agency (NITDA)
      3.3.4 National Film and Video Censors Board (NFVCB), National Broadcasting

              Commission (NBC), National Council for Arts and Culture (NCAC) and Trade
              Malpractices Investigation Panel (TMIP)
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

3.1 Introduction
       As we learnt in Unit 1, the main intellectual property laws in Nigeria are the Patent and
       Designs Act, the Trademarks Act and the Copyright Act. The institutional frameworks
       under these Acts will be discussed in more detail in later parts of this course. For now, it
       suffices to note that sections 3, 4, 15 and 16 of the Patent and Designs Act creates a
       Registry to be overseen by the Patent and Designs Registrar. Likewise, section 1 of the
       Trademarks Act establishes a registry administered by the Registrar of Trademarks. Both
       the Registrar of Patents and Designs, and Trademarks are appointed by the Federal Civil
       Service Commission. Currently, the Commercial Law Department of the Federal
       Ministry of Trade and Investment supervises issues of Patents, Industrial Designs and
       Trademarks in Nigeria. Thus, the Patent, Designs and Trademark Registry is domiciled
       in the Commercial Law Department of the Federal Ministry of Trade and Investment. On
       the other hand, the section 34 of the Copyright Act establishes the Nigerian Copyright
       Commission (NCC) and empowers it to administer and regulate of copyright and related
       rights in Nigeria.

                                                                                                                     39
      Apart from the foregoing, other institutions exist, pursuant to other legislations, with
      functions that bear relevance on the protection and development of intellectual property
      in Nigeria. The institutions include: the Federal Competition and Consumer Protection
      Commission (FCCPC) established under the FCCPC Act 2018; the National Office of
      the Technology Acquisition and Protection (NOTAP) established under the NOTAP Act;
      the National Information and Technology Development Agency (NITDA) established by
      the NITDA Act; the National Film and Video Censors Board (NFVCB) established under
      the NFVCB Act; the Trade Malpractices Investigation Panel (TMIP) created under the
      Trade Malpractices (Miscellaneous Offences) Act; the National Broadcasting
      Commission (NBC) created under the NBC Act; and the National Council for Arts and
      Culture (NCAC) established under the NCAC Act.

3.2 Learning outcomes
      At the end of your study in this unit, you should be able to do the following:
        1) Identify other national institutions that are relevant to the development and
             protection of intellectual property in Nigeria
        2) Explain the specific roles of those other national institutions in relation to the
             development and protection of intellectual property in Nigeria.

3.3 The Institutional Framework for Intellectual Property Protection in Nigeria
      3.3.1 Federal Competition and Consumer Protection Commission (FCCPC)
             In terms of section 17 of the FCCPC Act, the FCCPC's functions include to: initiate
             broad-based policies and review economic activities in Nigeria to identify anti-
             competitive and anti-consumer protection and restrictive practices which may
             adversely affect the economic interest of consumers; eliminate anti-competitive
             agreements, misleading, unfair, deceptive or unconscionable marketing, trading
             and business practices; regulate and seek ways of removing from the market
             hazardous goods and services and cause offenders to replace such goods and
             services with safer and more appropriate alternatives; and to encourage trade,
             industry and professional associations to develop and enforce quality standards
             designed to safeguard consumers within their various fields including in the areas
             of intellectual property.

                                                                                                                    40
3.3.2 National Office of the Technology Acquisition and Protection (NOTAP)
       Section 4 of the NOTAP Act empowers NOTAP to encourage a more efficient
       process for the identification and selection of foreign technology; develop the
       negotiating skills of Nigerians with a view to ensuring the acquirement of the best
       contractual terms and conditions by Nigerian parties entering into any contract or
       agreement for the transfer of foreign technology; and to provide a more efficient
       process for the adaptation of imported technology.

       NOTAP is also tasked with the registration of all contracts or agreements having
       effect in Nigeria for the transfer of foreign technology to Nigerian parties. Every
       such contract or agreement will be registered if, in NOTAP's opinion, its purpose
       or intent is wholly or partially for or in connection with the use of trademarks; the
       right to use patented inventions; the supply of technical expertise in the form of the
       preparation of plans, diagrams, operating manuals or any other form of technical
       assistance of any description whatsoever; the supply of basic or detailed
       engineering; the supply of machinery and plant; and the provision of operation staff
       or managerial assistance and the training of personnel.

       Further, the enabling law enjoins NOTAP to monitor, on a continuous basis, the
       execution of any contracts or agreements registered by NOTAP; commercialise
       viable R&D results emanating from both private and public research institutions;
       promote intellectual property rights and encourage innovation among Nigerian
       scientists, researchers and inventors; and to establishment network of linkages
       among researchers, inventors, industry and research institutions. In furtherance to
       its mandate under the Act, NOTAP has, among others, so far established over 40
       Intellectual Property and Technology Transfer Offices (IPTTOS) in tertiary
       institutions in Nigeria. It also runs very vibrant intellectual property
       commercialisation and technology transfer services.

3.3.3 National Information and Technology Development Agency (NITDA)
       Section 6 of the NITDA Act tasks NITDA to, among others create a framework for
       the planning, research, development, standardization, application, coordination,
       monitoring, evaluation and regulation of information technology practices,
       activities and systems in Nigeria; provide universal access for information

                                                                                                              41
       technology and systems penetration in rural, urban and under-served areas; develop
       guidelines for the standardization and certification of information technology
       escrow source code and object code domiciliation, application and delivery
       systems in Nigeria.

       In pursuance to its statutory functions, NITDA maintains and operates the .gov.ng
       domain name in Nigeria. In this connection, NITDA (in cooperation with the
       Nigerian Internet Registration Association ­ NiRA) is responsible for the
       registration of users (mainly Federal, State and Local Government agencies) of the
       domain name. It is also responsible, as a forum of first instance where parties
       cannot settle, for the resolution of dispute arising from the use of the domain name.

3.3.4 National Film and Video Censors Board (NFVCB), National Broadcasting
         Commission (NBC), National Council for Arts and Culture (NCAC) and
         Trade Malpractices Investigation Panel (TMIP)

       Under section 2 of the NFVCB Act, the NFVCB is empowered, among others, to
       licence persons to exhibit films and video works in Nigeria; licence premises for
       the purposes of exhibiting films and video works in Nigeria; censor films and video
       works in Nigeria; regulate and prescribe safety precautions to be observed in
       licensed premises; and regulate and control cinematographic exhibitions.

       On its part, the NBC is tasked by section 2 of the NBC Act to, among others,
       regulate and control the Nigerian broadcast industry; undertake research and
       development in the broadcast industry; receive, process and consider applications
       for the ownership of radio and television stations, including cable television
       services, direct satellite broadcast and any other medium of broadcasting and to
       recommend applications through the Minister to the President, for the grant of radio
       and television licences. The NBC is also enjoined to promote Nigerian indigenous
       cultures, moral and community life through broadcasting. In this connection, the
       NBC's role seems to align with the functions of the NCAC.

       Section 3 of the NCAC Act empowers the NCAC, among others, to promote and
       foster the appreciation, revival and development of Nigerian arts and culture; foster
       the development of literary, visual and the performing arts in Nigeria; assist the

                                                                                                              42
             National Commission for Museums and Monument (NCMM) in the creation,
             acquisition and preservation of artistic works, cultural monuments and
             depositories; organise and promote exhibition in visual, performing and literary art;
             and to promote the development of music, traditional dancing, drama, opera,
             cinema, films, photography, folklore, oral tradition, literature, poetry, painting,
             sculpture, architecture, town planning and general arts, woodwork, embroidery,
             weaving and similar crafts.

             Finally, in terms of section 2 of the Trade Malpractices (Miscellaneous Offences)
             Act, the TMIP is established to investigate offences under the Act and report its
             finding to the Attorney General of the Federation for prosecution. By virtue of
             section 1 of the Act, the offences include the labelling, packaging, selling, offering
             for sale, or advertising of any product that is false or misleading or likely to create
             a wrong impression as to the character, quality, brand name, value, composition,
             merit or safety of the product.

                                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3
                   The Nigeria Copyright Commission and the Registrar of Patents, Designs
                   and Trademarks are the only agencies responsible for the development and
                   promotion of intellectual property in Nigeria. Do you agree?

3.4 Summary
      In this unit, we have learnt about the Other national institutions that are relevant to the
      development and protection of intellectual property in Nigeria, apart from those created
      under the Patent and Designs Act, the Trademarks Act and the Copyright Act. The
      specific roles of those other national institutions in relation to the development and
      protection of intellectual property in Nigeria. Further, in this Unit, we have identified and
      discussed other key institutions in Nigeria that are saddled with responsibilities that relate
      to the development and protection of intellectual property in Nigeria, apart from those
      established under the Patent and Designs Act, the Trademarks Act and the Copyright
      Act. These institutions include the Federal Competition and Consumer Protection
      Commission (FCCPC); the National Office of the Technology Acquisition and
      Protection (NOTAP); the National Information and Technology Development Agency

                                                                                                                    43
(NITDA); the National Film and Video Censors Board (NFVCB); the Trade Malpractices
Investigation Panel (TMIP); the National Broadcasting Commission (NBC); and the
National Council for Arts and Culture (NCAC).

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

1) Adejoke Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)

2) Chijioke Okorie, `An analysis of the IP-related provisions of the Nigerian Federal

Competition and Consumer Protection Act 2019' (2019) 14(8) Journal of Intellectual

Property Law and Practice, 613-621

3) NCAC, `About us', https://www.ncac.gov.ng/about-us/

4) NITDA/NIRA  `.Gov.Ng              Domain  Management                 Guide',

https://www.nira.org.ng/images/pdf/Government_Domain_Guidlines.pdf

5) NITDA, `Services', https://nitda.gov.ng/gov-ng-domain-registration/

6) NOTAP, https://www.notap.gov.ng/

                                                                                       44
MODULE 2 PROTECTION OF COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Unit 1: History of Copyright Protection in Nigeria

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 History of Copyright Protection in Nigeria
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction
       The protection of copyright and related rights is provided for under the Copyright Act,
       Cap C28, Laws of the Federation of Nigeria. You have already learnt about the meaning
       of copyright and related rights in Module 1. As such, we will not repeat the discussion
       here. In this module, we will be focusing on specific issues such as the substance of
       copyright; qualifying factors for copyright protection; nature, scope and duration of
       copyright; authorship and ownership of copyright; copyright infringement and remedies;
       defences to copyright infringement suits; and administration/management of copyright
       in Nigeria.

       Copyright law concerns the right of authors or creators of books, music, visual arts,
       movies, etc., and the related rights of performers, producers of sound recordings and
       broadcasts, among others. It lays down the conditions for conferral and enforcement of
       the rights and exceptions and limitations to these rights. Copyright law provides the
       mechanism for protecting the private interests of the authors or creators, while at the
       same time preserving the public interest in the promotion of arts, culture and science and
       the overall societal welfare. In this unit, we discuss the history of copyright protection in
       Nigeria.

1.2 Learning outcomes
       At the conclusion of your study in this unit, you should be able to do trace and explain
       the history of copyright protection in Nigeria

                                                                                                                     45
1.3 History of Copyright Protection in Nigeria
       1) The body of laws relating to copyright in Nigeria developed over time and is still
           developing. There are two views on how this body of law developed in Nigeria. The
           first view traces it to the influence of foreign political and economic forces. By this,
           reference is made to the extension of the English Copyright Act 1911 to Nigeria
           under the colonial government. The other view has it that copyright is part of our
           traditional concept and has been in existence for as long as our culture exists. The
           proponents of this view draw their support from the practice where dancers and
           singers pay tribute to their predecessors in the trade before they commence
           performance. It seems, however, that the first view enjoys more support as the
           authorities point more to the fact that Nigerian copyright law has its roots in Britain.
           Indeed, the story of the history of copyright law and policy in Nigeria cannot be
           complete without linking it to the development of copyright law in Britain. This is
           so because of the historical link that Nigeria, as a formal colony of Britain, and
           Nigerian law generally have with Britain.

       2) The first copyright legislation in Britain was a censorship law. It was not about
           protecting the rights of authors or encouraging them to produce new works. Authors'
           rights were in little danger in the sixteenth century Britain and the arrival of the
           printing press was, if anything, energising to writers. The English government then
           became concerned about too many works being produced by the writers. The new
           technology was making seditious reading material widely available for the first time
           and the government urgently needed to control the flood of print matter, censorship
           being as legitimate an administrative function then as building roads. For this
           purpose, the English Crown found a formidable ally in the Guild of Stationers and
           the censorship law was in the form of a Charter granted to the stationers by the
           Crown. In the early days, the stationers had through their practices developed certain
           usages and customs which were made to ensure exclusivity of rights over books they
           had acquired from authors, in order to prevent copying by persons who were not
           members of their guild. Thus, in 1534, the Stationers secured protection against the
           importation of foreign books and in 1556, Mary Tudor, with her acute concern about
           religious opposition, granted the Stationers' Company a charter. This gave a power,
           in addition to the usual supervisory authority over the craft, to search out and destroy
           books printed in contravention of statute or proclamation. The company was enabled

                                                                                                                    46
    to organise what was in effect a licensing system by requiring lawfully printed books
    to be entered in its register. The right to make an entry was confined to company
    members, this being germane to the very purpose of the charter.

3) This system continued until 1662 but lapsed in 1679. King James II revived it for
    seven years in 1685 until 1694 when Parliament finally refused to renew the charter.
    The Stationers, who had argued forcefully against their loss of protection, were left
    with such claim to "copy-right" as they could make out of their own customary
    practices surrounding registration. As they also lost their search and seizure powers,
    and equity had not yet begun to grant injunctions to protect any interest they might
    establish, their only hope was common law and this they put to no decisive test.
    Thus, the stationers needed definite substantive rights and effective procedures to
    enforce them. So, they approached parliament and offered the then novel argument
    that authors had a natural and inherent right of ownership in what they wrote, and
    that furthermore, such ownership could be transferred to other parties by contract,
    like any other form of property. This argument paid off and saw the birth of the first
    recognisable modern copyright law ­ and in fact the first Intellectual Property Law
    ­ the Copyright Act of 1710 also known as the Statute of Anne.

4) Interestingly, the Act was concerned with interest in books and other writings. It
    granted sole right and liberty of printing books to authors and their assigns, but this
    right stemmed, nonetheless, from commercial exploitation rather than literary
    creation. Enforcing the right depended upon registering the book's title before
    publication with the Stationers' Company and this was enforceable by seizures and
    penalties. The right has a life span of 14 years subject to extension for another 14
    years if the author was alive at the time of the first expiration.

5) Soon after the passage of the Act, other creative arts started yearning for protection
    of their works, particularly the visual arts. Protection was first extended to
    engravings in 1735-1777; sculptures in 1798-1814; and paintings, photographs and
    drawings in 1862; performing rights in 1833-1842. In the early twentieth century,
    parliament saw it fit to bring all these measures into a single code since they all deal
    with the same subject ­ copyright, hence the enactment of the Copyright Act of 1911.
    The 1911 Act was also influenced by international concerns regarding copyright ­

                                                                                                             47
    need for foreign works to be afforded protection outside their shores and the need to
    set some form of international standards. The result of this was the Berne
    Convention, under which either the personal connection of the author with a Member
    State, or first publication in a Member state, was to secure copyright in others, under
    the principle of national treatment. At the Berlin revision of the Convention in 1908,
    Britain was obliged to accept the majority consensus on two matters: protection was
    to arise out of the act of creation itself, without any condition of registration or other
    formality ­ which obliged Britain to abandon the traditional requirement of
    Stationers' Company registration before suing; and the period of protection for most
    types of work was put to at least the author's life and 50 years.

6) Being a colony of Britain, and in order to protect the interests in creative products
    from Britain, Britain extended the 1911 Act to Nigeria through Order-in-council No.
    912 of 24 June 1912 which was made under section 25 of the 1911 Act. It is
    important to note that although a new Copyright Act was passed in England in 1956,
    Nigeria still continued to apply the 1911 Act until 1970 when the first indigenous
    Copyright Act was promulgated as Decree No. 61 of 1970, ten years after
    independence. According to Adewopo,
         "The impact of the (1911 Act) was limited probably due to what many
         described as the paucity of facility to generate copyright materials.
         Moreover, it did appear that the modern concept of individual proprietary
         right forged by the new Act was at variance with the traditional notion of
         communal ownership and free access."

7) The 1970 Decree came into force on 24 December of that year. It was however found
    to be very defective in many aspects. For instance, under the Decree, copyright for
    literary, musical and artistic works, cinematograph films and photographs lasted for
    only 25 years after the end of the year in which the author died. In the area of
    administration, there was no effective structure under the Decree. The Decree only
    made provisions for civil suit at the instance of the copyright owner with regards to
    enforcement and the criminal sanction was very minimal as the maximum penalty
    was 0.05K (Five kobo) per item seized up to a maximum of 10 (Ten Naira), with
    a possible prison sentence of 2 months for a second offence. In essence, enforcement
    was largely left in the hands of rights owners. It was these lapses and more that led
    to the promulgation of the Copyright Decree No. 47 of 1988. That Decree, now an

                                                                                                             48
           Act has been amended twice in 1992 and 1999. Observers have described the present
           Copyright Act as the most progressive in our legislative effort and the reason is not
           unconnected with the fact that the Act was fashioned after the World Intellectual
           Property Organisation (WIPO) Tunis model which incorporated standard provisions
           reflecting trends in global copyright legislation at that time. Specifically, the NCC
           was established under the new Act with a governing board serving as the institutional
           framework for the administration and regulation of copyright in Nigeria. There is
           also a stronger regime for criminal sanctions. While retaining the mechanism for
           civil enforcement by individual right owners, the Act makes provisions for the
           approval of collective management organisations (CMOs) for the collective
           management and enforcement of copyright on behalf of right owners.

       8) It is important to note that in the face of digitisation and its impact on the copyright
           landscape and to bring Nigeria's law in tune with its international obligations,
           actions have been commenced to review the Nigerian copyright law. The exercise
           led to the production of the Draft Copyright Bill, which was open for comments from
           relevant stakeholders. After the reception and examination of public comments, the
           Draft Copyright Bill was revised by the NCC. The revised draft was approved by
           the Federal Executive Council in 2017 and still awaits being forwarded to the
           National Assembly for consideration and passage.

                                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4
               In what ways did the development of copyright legislation in Britain influence
               Nigerian copyright law?

1.4 Summary
      We have learnt the history and origins of copyright protection and copyright law and
      policy formulation in Nigeria Moreover, in this Unit, we have discussed the history of
      copyright law in Nigeria, tracing its origin to copyright law making in Britain. This
      approach is founded on the uncontested premise that as a former colony of Britain,
      copyright protection in Nigeria framework has roots in the British copyright regime
      premiered by the Statute of Ann.

                                                                                                                    49
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
       1) Adebambo Adewopo, Nigerian Copyright System: Principles and Practice (Odade
            Publishers, 2012)
       2) Adejoke Oyewunmi Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)
       3) John O. Asein, Nigerian Copyright Law and Practice 2nd ed. (Books & Gavel
            Publishers, 2012)
       4) A Adewopo, Intellectual Property: A Pro-Development Vision of the Law and The
            Nigerian Intellectual Property Law and Policy Reform in The Knowledge Era,
            (Abuja: NIALS Press, 2012)
       5) William Cornish and David Llewelyn, Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyright,
            Trademarks and Allied Rights (Sweet and Maxwell, 2007)
       6) J Ginsburg, "`Une Chose Publique'? The Author's Domain and the Public Domain
            in Early British, French and US Copyright Law," (Public Law and Legal Theory
            Working Paper, No. 06-120, 2006)
       7) Desmond Oriakhogba and Alero Fenemigho,1 `Development, concept and scope of
            copyright protection in Nigeria: An overview' (2014) 5 Nnamdi Azikiwe University
            Journal of International Law and Jurisprudence 179-191
       8) Draft Copyright Bill 2015, http://graduatedresponse.org/new/wp-
            content/uploads/2016/02/DRAFT_COPYRIGHT_BILL_NOVEMBER-_2015.pdf

:

1 Parts of the discussion in this unit are excerpts drawn from the paper
                                                                                                                     50
MODULE 2 PROTECTION OF COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Unit 2: Subsistence of Copyright

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Nature and duration of copyright in eligible works

      2.3.1 Eligible Works
      2.3.2 Nature of Copyright in Eligible Works
      2.3.3 Duration of Copyright
2.4 Originality
2.5 Fixation
2.6 Other Qualifying Factors
      2.6.1 Status of the Author
      2.6.2 The Place of First Publication
      2.6.3 Reference to International Agreements
      2.6.4 The Work of Government or an International Body
2.7 Summary
2.8 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

2.1 Introduction
       Unlike patent, designs and trademarks (discussed in second semester) that require
       registration for their protection, copyright protection is automatic upon creation of the
       work and is not contingent on any form of registration. However, the subsistence of
       copyright in a work depends on whether the work is an eligible subject matter, it meets
       the requirements of originality and fixation and it bears appropriate link with its maker
       who must be a qualified person under the Copyright Act. Accordingly, in terms of section
       1 of the Copyright Act, the eligible subject matter or works for protection are literary
       works, musical works, artistic works, cinematograph works, sound recordings and
       broadcast. In terms of sections 26 and 31 of the Copyright Act, neigbouring or related
       rights, such as performers rights and expressions of folklore can also be regarded as
       eligible subject matter.

                                                                                                                     51
      Section 1(2) provides further eligibility requirements. It stipulates that literary, musical
      or artistic works shall not be eligible for copyright unless (a) sufficient effort has been
      expended on making the work to give it an original character; (b) the work has been fixed
      in any definite medium of expression now known or later to be developed, from which it
      can be perceived, reproduced or otherwise communicated either directly or with the aid
      of any machine or device. These provisions form the bases for the concepts of originality
      and fixation. Indeed, the concepts of originality and fixation are core threshold standards
      for qualification for copyright protection in Nigeria.

      In this unit, we will be examining the requirements for subsistence of copyright in eligible
      works under the Copyright Act. In particularly, we will be discussing originality,
      fixation, the nature and duration of eligible works, and other qualifying factors.

2.2 Learning Outcome
      At the end of study in this unit, you should be able to do the following:
          1) Identify the works eligible for protection under the Copyright Act
          2) Explain the nature and duration of copyright in the eligible works under the
               Copyright Act
          3) Discuss the requirements for subsistence of copyright in an eligible work under
               the Copyright Act, such as originality, fixation and other qualifying factors

2.3 Nature and Duration of Copyright in Eligible Works
      According to Ghosh, the boundaries of copyright are far from clear and difficult to
      discern as copyright law lacks analogous limits on the scope of the copyright owner's
      property interest, except for the boundaries imposed by the exceptions and limitations
      (discussed below). But, statute can highlight specifically what the right includes. Thus,
      even though it may be difficult for the purpose of quantification to determine the exact
      extent of copyright owners' property interest, the nature of the right protected by law can
      be deciphered from the law itself. For instance, section 6, 7 and 8 of the Copyright Act
      stipulates the general nature of copyright in eligible works. We will return to this shortly.

      For now, it should be noted that section 51(1) of the Copyright Act defines "work" in a
      descriptive manner to include translations, adaptation, new versions, or arrangements of
      pre-existing works, and anthologies or collection of works which, by reason of the

                                                                                                                    52
selection and arrangement of their content, present an original character. Specifically, the
eligible works under protection are listed in section 1 of the Copyright Act (copyright)
and in sections 26 and 31 of the Copyright Act (neighbouring or related rights).

2.3.1 Eligible Works
       Section 1 of the Copyright Act lists literary works, musical works, artistic works,
       cinematograph films, sound recordings and broadcasts as eligible works. These
       works are specifically defined under section 51 of the Copyright Act. Thus, while
       broadcast is defined as sound and television broadcast by wireless telegraphy or
       wire or both by satellite or cable programmes including re-broadcast, sound
       recording is defined as the first fixation of a sequence of sound capable of being
       perceived aurally and of being reproduced, but does not include a soundtrack
       associated with a cinematograph film. A cinematograph film is defined to include
       the first fixation of a sequence of visual images capable of being shown as a moving
       picture and of being the subject of reproduction including the records of a sound
       track associated with it. Furthermore, musical works mean any musical
       composition, irrespective of musical quality and includes works composed for
       musical accompaniment, while artistic works include, irrespective of quality,
       paintings, drawings, etchings, lithographs, woodcuts, engravings and prints, maps,
       plans, and diagrams, works of sculpture, photographs not comprised in a
       cinematograph film, including architectural works in form of building models, etc.
       It should be noted that in terms of section 1(3) of the Copyright Act, an artistic
       work will not be eligible for copyright protection, if at the time when the work is
       made, it is intended by the author to be used as a model or pattern to be multiplied
       by any industrial process. Asein and Oyewunmi are in accord on the point that this
       provision necessarily excludes such models or patterns because of their possible
       protection under section 12 of the Patent and Designs Act as industrial designs.
       That being said, literary work is defined to include novels, stories, poetic works,
       plays, stage directions, film scenarios, broadcasting scripts, choreographic works,
       computer programmes, written tables or compilations (databases), etc.

       The major concern of copyright in these works is not the idea but the manner in
       which the idea is represented or expressed. In other words, copyright does not

                                                                                                              53
       protect ideas but the manner in which the ideas are represented or expressed. It
       should also be noted that protection extends to works irrespective of their content,
       length, purpose, form or even quality. But copyright cannot be ascribed to a single
       word. This principle was upheld in the English case of Exxon Corp v. Exxon
       Insurance Consultant (52[1981] All E.R. p.241). In that case, the claimants
       objected to the use by the defendant of "Exxon" as part of their corporate name.
       They secured relief against passing off; but on the claim for infringement of
       copyright in the word, they failed before the court of first instance and on appeal
       to the Court of Appeal, the court held, per Stephenson L.J., relying on a section in
       the repealed English Copyright Act 1956 similar to section 1 of our Copyright Act,
       as follows,

          "[...] that for which protection is sought in the instant case does not appear
          to me to have any of the qualities which common sense would demand. It
          conveys no information; it provides no instruction; it gives no pleasure that
          I can conceive; it is simply an artificial combination of four letters of the
          alphabet which serves a purpose only when it is used in juxtaposition with
          other English words, to identify one or other of the companies in the
          claimant group".

2.3.2 Nature of Copyright in Eligible Works
       Sections 6 of the Copyright Act defines the nature of copyright in the eligible
       works. In this connection, and in terms of section 6, copyright in a work shall be
       the exclusive right to control the doing in Nigeria of any of the acts listed under it
       in respect of a substantial part or the whole of a work either in its original form or
       in any form recognisably derived from the original. Commenting on section 6,
       Asein had argued that the
            "concept of right generally connotes the legal power or liberty to do
            something, but in the case of copyright, the right conferred on the owner
            is the power to "stop others from doing something," i.e. to prevent the
            exploitation of a work by unauthorised persons. Put differently, copyright
            is a negative right, or more appropriately, an exclusionary right, to
            exclude others from the unauthorised use rather than a positive right
            entitling the owner to exploit the work in question. For instance, the right
            conferred does not authorise the copyright owner to distribute or publish
            the work but rather gives him the exclusive right to control and exclude
            others from its distribution and publication"

                                                                                                              54
While the foregoing appears as a sound reasoning, it should however be carefully
scrutinised against the backdrop of the entire provision of section 6. Granted
copyright is exclusive and negative in nature, its negativity does not arise from the
fact that it does not confer the owner with the right do any of the acts listed in
section 6 of the Copyright Act, as Asein would have us believe. Rather, the
negative nature of copyright inheres in the fact that third parties are prevented from
doing those acts in respect of the works, which the copyright owner is empowered
to do, without the copyright owner's authority. Indeed, it appears unusual for a
person who has a right to authorise or exclude the doing of any act in respect of
his/her property (copyright) to not be able to do same act him/her self in respect of
such property. Moreover, the power of a copyright owner over his/her work is not
limited to the right stated in sections 6 (discussed below). It extends to the moral
right of the author of a work as enshrined in section 12 of the Copyright Act. In
terms of that section, authors (including their heirs and successors in title) of a work
in which copyright subsists have a perpetual, inalienable and imprescriptible right
to claim authorship of the work, be named as authors of the work and to object and
seek relief in connection with any distortion, mutilation or other modification of or
any other derogatory action in relation to the work, where such action would be or
is prejudicial to their honour or reputation. This right is otherwise referred to as
authors' paternal and attribution rights.

That being said, section 6(1) of the Copyright Act provides that copyright in the
case of literary or musical works is the exclusive right to do or authorise the doing
in Nigeria of the reproduction, publication, public performance, translation and its
reproduction, recording or making into a film, commercial distribution (by way of
rental, hire, lease, or loan, etc.), broadcast or communication to the public,
adaptation, etc. of such works. In the case of artistic works, it extends to the
reproduction, publication, adaptation, inclusion in films, etc. of the artistic works.
Also, owners of cinematograph films have the exclusive rights to do, or authorise,
the making of a copy of the film, causing of the film to be seen and/or heard in
public as the case may be, making of any recording of the sound track of the film,
and commercially distributing the film (by way of rental, lease, hire, loan, etc.).
Further, section 7 of the Copyright Act provides that copyright in sound recording
shall be the exclusive rights to control in Nigeria the reproduction, broadcast or

                                                                                                       55
communication to the public, and commercial distributing (by way of rental, lease,
hire, loan, etc.) of the film. Finally, section 8 of the Copyright Act confers on the
owner of the copyright in broadcasts the exclusive right to control in Nigeria the
recording and re-broadcasting, the communication to the public, and commercially
distribute the film (by way of rental, lease, hire, loan, etc.) of such broadcast.

Part II of the Copyright Act introduced a different class of works falling under
copyright protection. These works are termed neighbouring rights. They are also
known as related rights. According to Adewopo, the neighbouring rights concept
was imported into the Nigerian copyright law in keeping with the international
intellectual property architecture in the context of extending protection to related
rights such as live performances. The protection of performers rights was already
captured in international instruments such as the Rome Convention for Protection
of Performers, and Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting Organisations
1961, the WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 1996, and the Beijing
Treaty on Audio-visual Performances 2012.

Specifically, the work of performers and folklore forms neighbouring rights under
the Copyright Act. The protection of folklore in Nigeria is discussed in Module 3.
For now, it should be noted that performers' rights are not copyright properly so
called. They are rights so closely related to copyright that need some form of
protection, hence they are called neighbouring rights. Even though performers
engage in activities which are more immediately artistic and creative than those of
entrepreneurs who enjoy copyrights in sound recordings, films and broadcast, it
took so long, in most jurisdictions, for performing rights to gain any form of
protection. For instance, it was not until 1958 that performers were allowed the
right to some civil action against infringers of their right through the Performers
Protection Act of that year in the UK. The reason for this, according to Cornish and
Llewellyn, was that it was claimed that performers were protected indirectly by the
entrepreneurial rights of producers; that those financially responsible were best
placed to pursue imitators; and that to give copyright to all performers in a play, a
film or an orchestra would lead to quite unnecessary complexity.

                                                                                                       56
       The Rome Convention influenced the protection of performers' rights in Nigeria.
       By virtue of section 26 of the Copyright Act, a performer in Nigeria shall have the
       exclusive right to control, in relation to his/her performance, the performing,
       recording, live broadcast, reproduction in any material form, and the adaptation of
       the performance. Performance for this purpose includes a dramatic performance
       (which includes dance and mime), a musical performance, and a reading or
       recitation of literary act or any similar presentation which is or so far as it is, a live
       performance given by one or more individuals.

2.3.3 Duration of Copyright
       A work that qualified for copyright protection does not enjoy such protection in
       perpetuity. In other words, the author of, and/or owner of copyright in, such work
       will not enjoy copyright forever. The enjoyment of the right is limited by time,
       among others. This right usually begins to run from the time of creation of the
       work, or in some cases the moment in which the work was published. Under the
       Berne Convention, the duration for copyright is the life of the author and not less
       than 50 years from his death. The Berne Convention also establishes periods of
       protection for works in respect of which the duration cannot be based on the life of
       a single human author, for example, cinematographic works or sound recordings.
       The Berne Convention applies, as a guide, to countries who are parties to it in the
       sense of defining minimum standards of protection below which the national
       copyright legislation of member states cannot fall.

       Under the Copyright Act, literary, musical and artistic works have a duration of the
       life of the author and 70 years after the end of the year in which the author dies and
       in the case of such works authored by government or a corporate body, the duration
       is 70 years after the end of the year in which the work was first published. For
       anonymous or pseudonymous works, the duration is 70 years from the end of the
       year in which the work was first published provided that when the author becomes
       known, the term of the right will run through the life of the author and for 70 years
       after the end of the year in which he died. Where the work is under a joint
       authorship, 70 years will begin to run from the end of the year in which the last
       author died. For cinematograph films, photographs, and sound recordings, the
       duration is 50 years after the end of the year in which the work was first published,

                                                                                                              57
             while broadcasts also have 50 years term after the end of the year in which the
             broadcast first took place (generally, see section 2 of, and item 1, 2, 3 and 4 of the
             1st Schedule to, the Copyright Act).

             Performers' right enjoys protection for a term of 50 years from the end of the year
             in which the performance first took place (section 27 of the Copyright Act). It has
             been rightly posited, by Adewopo, that the effect of the term exceeding the life of
             the author is that copyright law anticipates and makes allowance for the heirs and
             successors of an author to derive benefit accruing from the proprietary interest of
             an author as much as the same way he could have been entitled to enjoying the
             benefits of inheriting physical property. We should note that once the term of
             protection under the Copyright Act lapses, the work falls into the public domain
             and therefore allows for free usage.

2.4 Originality
      International copyright treaties do not define the scope of originality. But, the
      requirement of originality for protection may simply be presumed from the treaties. For
      instance, after defining the literary and artistic works falling under its ambit, the Berne
      Convention provides that "translations, adaptations, arrangements of music and other
      alterations of a literary or artistic work shall be protected as original works without
      prejudice to the copyright in the original work" (article 2(1) and (3)). Thus, it appears the
      definition of the scope of originality was reserved for national legislators.

      Even so, most national copyright laws do not define the concept. They stop at expressly
      requiring originality as a criterion, among others, for copyright subsistence. Nonetheless,
      there have been judicial attempts at defining the scope of the concept. Such attempts have
      led to the existence of two schools of thoughts: the objective school and the subjective
      school. The objective school has its roots in the common law tradition led by Britain and
      it is established in a long line of cases (See for instance, University of London Press v
      University Tutorial Press [1916] 2 Ch. 601; Ladbroke (Football) v William Hill [1964]
      1 All ER 465; Exxon Corp v Exxon Insurance Consultants [1982] RPC 69; Express
      Newspapers v Liverpool Daily Post [1985] FSR 306; Sawkins v Hyperion [2005] RPC
      (32) 808).

                                                                                                                    58
The objective school is otherwise known as the "sweat of the brow" or "industrious
collection" school. According to this school, for a work to be original, it is necessary to
show that sufficient skill and labour or industry was expended in making the work. It is
not necessary to show creative input in making the work (see Newspaper Licensing
Agency Ltd v. Marks and Spencer Plc [2002] RPC 4; Designers Guild Ltd v Russell
Williams (Textiles) Ltd [2001] 1 All ER 700; SAS Institute Inc. v World Programming
Ltd [2013] EWCA Civ 1482; Kelly v. Morris (1866), L.R. 1 Eq. 69; U & R Tax Services
Ltd. v. H & R Block Canada Inc. (1995), 62 C.P.R; CCH Canadian Ltd. v. Law Society
of Upper Canada [2002] FCA 187); CCH Canadian Ltd v Law Society of Upper Canada
([2004] 1 SCR 339; Desktop Marketing Systems Pty Ltd v. Telstra Corporation Ltd
[2002] FCAFC 112; Emerson v Davies 8 F Cas 615 (Mass CC, 1845); Sands &
McDougall Pty Ltd v Robinson (1917) 23 CLR 49; Ice TV Pty Ltd v. Nine Network
Australia Pty Ltd ((2009) 239 CLR 458).

Under the subjective or creativity school it is impossible to find originality in the absence
of creativity. The standard of originality requires at least minimal creativity. The form of
creativity required here is not the novelty standard required under patent law. It is the
creativity, which connotes that the work in question is not merely a copied work but one
that involves labour, skill and some independent judgment or intellectual activity on the
part of the author. This school of thought is now firmly established in the US following
the US Supreme Court decision in the case of Feist Publication Inc. v Rural Telephone
Service (499, U.S. 340 (1991)).

Like other copyright laws, the Copyright Act makes originality a criterion for copyright
subsistence. Accordingly, section 1(2)(a) provides that "literary, musical or artistic work
shall not be eligible for copyright unless sufficient effort has been expended on making
the work to give it an original character". This provision gives an inkling as to the
concept of originality under the Copyright Act. It requires "sufficient effort" be expended
in the making of a work for it to be regarded as original. The line of cases on subsistence
of copyright in Nigeria confirms this assertion.

First, there is the case of Offrey v Ola (Suit No. HOS/23/68), wherein the plaintiff
designed and put out for sale a school record book known as "New Era Scheme of Work
and Record Books". The plaintiff's labour in producing the book mainly consisted in the

                                                                                                              59
drawing of several horizontal and vertical lines. He later discovered that the defendants
were producing and selling some record books, which were materially the same as his
own especially at pages 1to 52 of the alleged infringing book. Consequently, he sued for
damages and injunctions. The court dismissed the plaintiff's claim and held that,

     [...]there was no evidence that the plaintiff had put into its production some
     substantial amount of labour. The record book merely showed a neat layout of
     vertical and horizontal columns on pages 1 to 52. Such a layout could not be
     called an original literary work or an original compilation for giving ready,
     convenient and accurate information to people who needed such information.
     The plaintiff had therefore not established that the record book in question is an
     original literary work or compilation being the result of his labour and skill.

There is also the case of Yemitan v Daily Times & Anor. ([1977-1989] 2 IPLR 141-156),
where the plaintiff alleged that the copyright in his article titled "The day the Lagoon
Caught Fire" was infringed by the defendant. According to the plaintiff, the defendants
in their magazine called the "Headlines" reproduced his said article without
authorisation. Thus, the plaintiff sued for damages and injunctions against the
defendants. The court, while deciding in favour of the plaintiff held that copyright in a
work "belongs to the author, who is the one that actually expended the work, labour,
knowledge and skill".

The foregoing cases were decided before the coming into force of the Copyright Act.
They were decided under the repealed Copyright Decree, No. 61 of 1970 (section
1(2)(a)), which provision on originality was simply rehashed under the extant Copyright
Act. Little wonders, therefore, the pronouncements therein reflect the attitude of the
court on the issue of originality under the extant Copyright Act.

This assertion is confirmed by the more recent case of Spreevision Ltd & Anor. v Nestle
Nigeria Plc & Ors (Suit No.: FHC/IKJ/CS/183/2012, unreported ruling of 10 September
2013 per Yinusa J). In that case, the plaintiffs claim that they built a concept for the
development of digital kiosk pavilion, which they stored in a compact disk and flash
drive and sent to the defendants. They further alleged that the defendants asked them to
build a kiosk for demonstration based on the concept for inspection. According to the
plaintiffs, they did not hear from the defendants again but discovered later that the
defendants had gone ahead to develop the kiosk and displayed it at the premises of

                                                                                                              60
Universities of Lagos and Ibadan respectively. Consequently, the plaintiffs sought to
enforce the copyright in their concept for the development of digital kiosk pavilion as an
artistic work through this suit. The defendants filed a motion of preliminary objection to
the suit on the ground, among others, that the plaintiffs possess no copyright in the subject
matter of the suit. According to the defendants, the plaintiffs admitted in paragraphs 7, 8
and 14 of their statement of claim that the subject matter of the suit was intended to be
used as a model or pattern to be multiplied by industrial process. As such, the defendants
rightly contended that on the basis of section 1(3) of the Copyright Act the plaintiffs have
no copyright in the alleged artistic work. By virtue of section 1(3) of the Copyright Act,
an artistic work is ineligible for copyright protection if, at the time of its creation, it is
intended by the creator to be used as model or pattern to be multiplied by any industrial
process.

The court upheld the defendants' objection and in so doing commented on the subsistence
of copyright under section 1(2) as follows,

       [r]ecognition of copyright is premised on some sufficient effort having been
       expended on the work to give it an original character [...] for a work to be
       eligible for copyright protection, it must be original. The essence of originality
       is that the author of the work must have devoted skill and labour to its creation.

The court's position in Spreevision (above) on the standard of originality under the
Copyright Act is supportable. In this regard, there is also the case of Ifeanyi Okoyo v
Prompt and Quality Services & Anor ([2003-2007] 5 IPLR 117-135), wherein the
plaintiffs sought to enforce their copyright in their architectural drawings, which the
defendant allegedly infringed. The defendants filed a notice of preliminary objection to
the suit on the ground that the plaintiffs lack locus standi to institute the suit because they
are not registered architects under the Architects (Registration, etc) Act. In considering
the objection, the court had to determine the criteria for enforcement of copyright in
Nigeria. Of present relevance is the ruling of the court on originality. After reproducing
section 2(1) above, the court stated that

       it is pertinent to observe that a literary or musical work is not eligible for
       copyright unless sufficient effort has been expended in making it in order to
       give it an original character. This is a matter of facts which must be proved by
       evidence. Save as above, the author of an artistic, particularly, work of
       Architecture, is not required to fulfil any other conditions to make his work
       eligible for Copyright.

                                                                                                              61
      The concluding part of the above pronouncement should be understood within the
      context of the above case alone. It must not be taken as a general provision of the law
      regarding copyright protection in Nigeria. This is so because originality is only one of
      the conditions for copyright eligibility under the Copyright Act. The conditions include
      fixation, which will be discussed below, among others. That being said, the court's
      position in the case of Yeni Anikulapo-Kuti & Ors. v Iseli & Ors ([2003-2007] 5 I.P.L.R.
      53-73), which involves the issue of authorship and copyright subsistence in a musical
      work, should be noted. In that case, the court held that a musical work must originate
      from its author who has expended special skill, and labour in producing it.

      In essence, a determination of originality under the Copyright Act will involve a
      definition of the term "sufficient effort". The question of what is "sufficient effort" is
      obviously a matter of degree, which would be determined on a case-by-case basis. And
      it appears the courts will not settle for some trivial amount of labour and skill or "sweat
      of the brow" when determining the question of originality. Also, the question of
      "sufficient effort" simply means determining the amount of "sweat of the brow" or
      "labour and skill" and not the creativity expended in making a work. Thus, the
      determination of whether a work is original under the Copyright Act would require an
      objective test. Also, the Copyright Act protects literary, artistic and musical works
      irrespective of their literary, artistic or musical quality. Further, although copyists are not
      protected under the Copyright Act (ICIC (Directory Publishers) Ltd v Ekko Delta (Nig)
      Ltd [1977-1989] 2 IPLR 32), a work shall not be ineligible for copyright protection
      merely because the making of the work involved an infringement of copyright in some
      other work (section 1(4) of the Copyright Act). This underscores the fact that the
      Copyright Act does not seek to protect copyright arising from a novel work. It seeks to
      protect copyright in a work, which originates from sufficient effort or "sweat of the brow"
      or "labour and skill" of the author.

2.5 Fixation
      Not all countries require fixation as part of the condition for copyright protection. In fact,
      the TRIPs agreement does not contain any express provision in that regard. Even the
      Berne Convention, which the TRIPS agreement (Article 1) incorporates, does not state
      any minimum standard for fixation. It merely states that copyright shall subsist in literary

                                                                                                                    62
and artistic works whatever may be the mode or form of its expression (Berne
Convention, article 2(1)). Regarding the mode or form of expression, the Berne
Convention (article 2(2)) states that it "shall be a matter for legislation in the countries
of the Union to prescribe that works in general or any specified categories of works shall
not be protected unless they have been fixed in some material form". In essence, the
Berne Convention left fixation issues to be determined by the legislature of respective
members of the Union. According to White, the absence of fixation requirement in the
Berne Convention "is meant to allow the Convention's [...] member nations to determine
individually whether they wish to impose a requirement that the work seeking protection
be fixed in a tangible format, that it need not be fixed at all, or that it must meet some
other standard in between these extremes".

The fixation requirement serves very useful purposes, the most fundamental of which,
According to Adewopo, is the evidentiary purpose. Even in countries like France where
the copyright law is silent on the fixation requirement, the evidentiary purpose of fixation
has been established. Perzanowski provides a lucid explanation of the evidentiary
purpose of fixation. According to the author, by the fixation requirements, copyright law
"avoids problems of proof that would otherwise stymie enforcement efforts. Fixation
clarifies questions of authorship and ownership, and it defines the bounds of copyright
grant through reference to a stable instantiation that can be compared to alleged
infringements." Another purpose of fixation, as suggested by Carpenter and Hetcher, is
that it acts as "check on the capaciousness of the originality requirement". The point
being made is that without fixation requirement, the amount of works coming under
copyright protection may be open-ended since the only requirement for eligibility would
be originality. In the authors' view, "the fixation requirement cabins the writ of
copyright, as a range of original works would be copyrightable but for fixation". A third
purpose is proffered by Gordon to the effect that fixation allows third parties to interact
appropriately with intellectual works. According to this author, fixation requirement
provides tangibility for copyright works thus enabling authorised and fair use of the
works. Perhaps, a fourth purpose would be that fixation of a work makes it easy to
determine when the work was made when considering copyright duration. It has also
been regarded as serving the purpose of notice to other creators and users of work as to
rights existing in a work.

                                                                                                              63
Under the Copyright Act, a literary, musical or artistic work will not be eligible for
copyright protection unless the work has been fixed in any definite medium of expression
now known or later to be developed from which it can be perceived, reproduced or
otherwise communicated either directly or with the aid of any machine or device (Section
1(2)(b)). This provision was briefly pronounced upon in the case of Yeni Anikulapo-Kuti
& Ors. v Iseli & Ors (supra). The case involves claims for injunctions against the
defendants by the plaintiffs as administrators of the estate of the late Nigerian music icon
Fela Anikulapo-Kuti (Fela) on the ground that the defendants were about to record and
sell certain pieces of music composed by Fela during his lifetime. As a defence, the
defendants averred that the pieces of music upon which the plaintiffs' claims rests are
not in any fixed medium. The defendants did not present any evidence. They merely
rested their case on that of the plaintiffs'. After reviewing the evidence presented by the
plaintiffs, the court found that the plaintiffs sufficiently showed the existence of the
pieces of music in issue. In reaching the conclusion, the court held ­ per Aliyu J. ­ that
the expression "fixed in any medium of expression now known or later to be developed"
as stated above does not need any technical interpretation. According to the court, the
"words are clear and unambiguous and they should be given their ordinary natural
meaning. The phrase simply means that the [...] work to be eligible for copyright, must
be in tangible medium without specifying the form in which it must be".

Thus, it could be argued that any medium that makes perception, reproduction and/or
communication of a work possible would be sufficient to satisfy the fixation requirement
in the Copyright Act. In this regard, the fixation requirement under the Copyright Act
shares similarity with the USA fixation provision contained in section 102(a) of the US
Copyright Act (USCA). However, both legislation differ at the point where USCA
requires fixation for a period of not more than "transitory duration" as an additional
fixation requirement. That notwithstanding, the Copyright Act may be interpreted,
according to Adewopo, to the effect that the type of "fixation required to vest protection
is beyond the transient projection. The medium must allow for some sustained presence
of permanent nature".

A further reading of the provision in the Copyright Act shows that mention is not made
of cinematograph films, sound recordings and broadcast. This creates an impression that
those works do not require fixation for copyright eligibility in Nigeria. Indeed, According

                                                                                                              64
      to Adewopo, a broadcast is "exempted from [fixation] requirement as it may be protected
      even if it is unfixed in form. For instance, a live broadcast to the public is for this reason
      not required to be simultaneously recorded in order to gain protection". The definition of
      broadcast under the Copyright Act confirms this position. According to the section 51(1)
      of the Copyright Act, broadcast means sound or television broadcast by wireless
      telegraph or wire or both, or by satellite or cable programmes and includes re-broadcast.
      However, the same cannot be said of cinematograph film and sound recording.
      Cinematograph film is defined to include the first fixation of a sequence of visual images
      capable of being shown as a moving picture and of being the subject of reproduction, and
      it includes the recording of a sound track associated with the cinematograph film (section
      51(1) of the Copyright Act). Similarly, sound recording means the first fixation of a
      sequence of sound capable of being perceived aurally and of being reproduced, but does
      not include a sound track associated with a cinematograph film (section 51(1) of the
      Copyright Act).

      The effect of the foregoing is that cinematograph film and sound recordings require some
      form of recording which makes them capable of being perceived, reproduced and
      communicated. In respect of performers' rights, the Copyright Act does not make
      fixation of performances as a requirement for enforcement. After stating the acts over
      which a performer has exclusive control in respect of his performance, the Copyright Act
      defines performance to include a dramatic performance, musical performance and a
      reading or recitation of literary or any similar presentation which is or so far as it is a live
      performance given by one or more individuals (section 51(1) of the Copyright Act).

2.6 Other Qualifying Factors ­ connection between the maker, an eligible work and
      Nigerian territory
      The Copyright Act makes provisions relating to appropriate linkages that must exist
      between an eligible work, the maker of the work and the territory of Nigeria. The point
      has been made earlier that intellectual property, including copyright, protection is
      territorial. As such, copyright Nigeria is protected only to the extent stipulated under the
      Copyright Act. Thus, apart from compliance with the requirements of originality, fixation
      and eligibility of the work, the Copyright Act also requires that the maker of the work
      must be linked to the Nigerian territory in the ways defined by the Copyright Act. Indeed,

                                                                                                                    65
according to Asein, it is "correct to assert that copyright does not subsist in a work under
the Act unless such a work or its author is in some way linked to Nigeria [and] the mere
fact that there is an international obligation to which Nigeria is bound does not entitle a
work to protection under the [...] Act". In this connection, and as stipulated in sections 2,
3, 4, and 5 of the Act, the required connection can be established through the status of
the author; the place of first publication; reference to international agreements; or the
work pf government or an international body.
2.6.1 Status of the Author

       Section 2 of the Copyright Act determines status of the author of the work either
       as a citizen of Nigeria, or a person domiciled in Nigeria, or a corporate entity
       incorporated in Nigeria and this is important for the conferral of copyright on the
       work. Specifically, the section vests copyright on every eligible work of which the
       author or, in the case of joint authorship, any of the authors is, at the time the work
       is made, a Nigerian citizen, or domiciled in Nigeria or is a body corporate
       incorporated under the laws of Nigeria. It is important to note that where an author
       satisfies this requirement in respect of an eligible work that is original and fixed in
       the appropriate medium, the court cannot accept extraneous factors to deprive such
       author of his/her copyright. This position was reached in the case of Ifeanyi Okoyo
       v Prompt and Quality Services & Anor (supra), wherein the plaintiffs sought to
       enforce their copyright in their architectural drawings, which the defendant
       allegedly infringed. The defendants filed a notice of preliminary objection to the
       suit on the ground that the plaintiffs lack locus standi to institute the suit because
       they are not registered architects under the Architects (Registration, etc) Act.
       Rejecting the defendant's objection, the court held that the "author of an artistic,
       particularly, work of Architecture, is not required to fulfil any other conditions to
       make his work eligible for Copyright".

2.6.2 The Place of First Publication
       Section 3 of the Copyright Act relates to eligible works which author does not fall
       within the categories in section 2. In this connection, literary, musical, artistic and
       cinematograph works, if they are first published in Nigeria, and sound recordings
       made in Nigeria are conferred with copyright. For purpose of this section,
       according to section 51(2), a work is deemed to have been published if copies of it
       have been made available in a manner sufficient to render the work assessable to

                                                                                                              66
      the public. Also, where only a part of a work has been published, that part will be
      treated as a separate work under the Copyright Act. Moreover, a work will still be
      regarded as published in Nigeria regardless of the fact that it has been published in
      another country insofar as the two publications occurred within a period of thirty
      days. Further, it is important to note that section 3 expressly excludes broadcasts
      from its ambit. Thus, according to Asein, this means that broadcast can only enjoy
      copyright protection in Nigeria its author is a Nigerian citizen, is domiciled in
      Nigeria, or is a cooperate entity incorporated in Nigeria, or is a government work
      or the work of an international body.

2.6.3 Reference to International Agreements
      Section 5 of the Copyright Act takes care situations where a work is made outside
      Nigeria by an author who does not fall under the categorisation in section 2 and the
      work is not covered by section 3 provided the country from where the work or
      author originates is party to an obligation in a treaty to which Nigeria is also a party,
      among others. According to Asein, section 5 seeks to "address the various
      obligations arising from Nigeria's accession to international treaties, and
      particularly to ensure that it complies with the principle of national treatment,"
      which requires that foreign works do not receive less favourable treatment as that
      given to Nigerian works. Oyewunmi seems to agree with Asein when she stated
      that "as a party to a number of international treaties," Nigeria "extends reciprocal
      protection to works emanating from citizens of member countries of such
      international agreements or treaties".

      Accordingly, section 5 confers copyright on a work, if on the date of publication,
      the maker is a citizen of or domiciled in, or a corporation of a country that is party
      to an obligation in a treaty or international agreement to which Nigeria is also a
      party. It also confers copyright on works first published in a country which is a
      party to an obligation in a treaty or other international agreement to which Nigeria
      is a party. Section 41 is important when discussion protection of copyright in
      Nigeria by reference to international agreements. As such, it must be read along
      with the foregoing provisions. In terms of section 41, where a country is a party to
      a treaty or other international agreement to which Nigeria is also a party and the
      Minister (of Justice) is satisfied that the country in question provides for protection

                                                                                                             67
of copyright in works which are protected under the Copyright Act, the Minister
may be Order in the Federal Gazette extend the application of the Act in respect of
any or all the eligible works under the Act to individuals who are citizens of or
domiciled in that country; corporations established under the law of that country;
works, other than sound recordings or broadcasts, first published in the country;
and to broadcast and sound recordings made in that country. Further, section 5
confers copyright on works published by the United Nations (UN) or any of its
specialised agencies; or by the African Union (AU) or by the Economic
Community of West Africa (ECOWAS).

However, where the question arises as to whether a country is a party to an
obligation in a treaty or other international agreement to which Nigeria is also a
party, a certificate from the NCC to that effect shall be conclusive proof of that
fact. Also of relevance in this regard, is the Copyright (Reciprocal Extension)
Order, I. N. 32 of 1972, which was made pursuant to section 14 of the repealed
1970 Copyright Decree. The Order was saved by section 3(3) of the Fifth Schedule
to the extant Copyright Act. The Order extended copyright protection under the
Act to citizens, residents, corporations of, and works published or made in
countries, such as the US, Canada, Ghana, Brazil, France, Japan, Norway, etc., who
are parties to the Universal Copyright Convention (UCC). Nigeria ratified the UCC
in November 1961 before the repealed 1970 Copyright Decree came into force.
However, as Oyewunmi observed, Nigeria has since, after and before the coming
into force of the extant Copyright Act, ratified a number of copyright treaties. As
such, there is need to amend the Order by including countries not mentioned therein
but who are parties to the new treaties. The treaties include the Berne Convention,
Rome Convention, WIPO Convention, the TRIPs Agreement, the WIPO Copyright
Treaty, WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty, Beijing Treaty of Audio-
visual Performance, and the Marrakesh Treaty for the Blind, Visually Impaired or
Otherwise Print Disabled.

The Nigerian courts have had opportunities to pronounce upon the protection of
copyright in Nigeria by reference to international agreements. For instance, there
is the case of Microsoft Corporation v Franike Associates Ltd ((2012) 3 NWLR
[pt1287] 301) wherein the claimant/appellant, a US company, instituted a

                                                                                                       68
      copyright infringement action to enforce the copyright on its Windows Operating
      System or software (computer program) against the defendant/respondent in
      Nigeria. The defendant objected to the suit on the ground that the court lacked
      jurisdiction because there is absence of reciprocal protection agreement between
      Nigeria and the US. The defendant made this claim because the claimant did not
      tender a certificate of reciprocity from the NCC or a reciprocity Order from the
      federal Gazette. The objection was upheld at both the trial court (the Federal High
      Court) and on appeal by the Court of Appeal. Oyewunmi has rightly pointed out
      that the court would have reached a different position if it had averted its mind to
      the reciprocal Order mentioned above. However, according to Olubiyi, the

         "implication of this decision is that it is necessary for a claimant who
         wishes to successfully enforce a foreign copyright to obtain a certificate
         from the NCC stating that the country through which it is entitled to
         copyright protection is a party to an international agreement to which
         Nigeria is also party. In addition to this, such a claimant should furnish a
         copy of the Federal Gazette in which an order by the Minister extending
         protection to such a country is made".

2.6.4 The Work of Government or an International Body
      Section 4 of the Copyright Act confers copyright on every eligible work that is
      made by or under the control of the of the government, a state authority or a
      prescribed international body. It is important to read this section along with section
      10(5) of the Copyright Act, which expressly states that copyright in such works
      shall vest initially in the government on behalf of the Federal Republic of Nigeria,
      on the state authority on behalf of the state concerned, or in the international body
      in question, as the case may be, and not on the author of the work. It appears that
      section 4 leaves prescription of the relevant international body for purpose of this
      Act to the NCC or the Minster. However, as Asein and Oyewunmi pointed out, it
      appears that the UN and its specialised agencies, the AU and ECOWAS mentioned
      in section 5 above would qualify as such bodies for purposes of section 4.

      One major issue that remains to be determined under section 4 is when can it be
      said that a work has been "made by or under the control of the of the government,
      a state authority or a prescribed international body". To resolve this question, it is
      important to keep in mind that section 4 of the Copyright Act has its roots in the

                                                                                                             69
             concept of Crown copyright enshrined in the copyright law of the UK (section 163
             of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 1988). Similar provisions have found
             their way into the copyright of other common law countries with historical colonial
             ties with the UK. These countries include Canada (section 12 Copyright Act
             (R.S.C., 1985, c. C-42)) and South Africa (sections 5 and 21(2), Copyright Act, No
             98 of 1978). While there has not been any case law on the point in Nigeria, both
             the Canadian Supreme Court and the South African Supreme Court of Appeal
             (SCA) have pronounced on similar provisions in their respective copyright statutes.
             Accordingly, the position is that "the production of the work needs to be the
             principal object of State direction and control and not merely an incidental or
             peripheral consequence of some generalised governmental licensing or monitoring
             power; the direction and control should be directly and specifically expressed with
             respect to the work in question, and should not be inferred from the fact of some
             residual or ultimate government veto" (see Biotech Lab. (Pty) Ltd v Beecham
             Group Plc & Anor. [Case No. 494/2000, delivered on 25 March 2002 ­ South
             Africa]; and Keatley Surveying Ltd v Teranet Inc. [2019 SCC 43 ­ Canada]).

                                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5
               1. Copyright is exclusive and negative in nature. What is your understanding

                   of exclusive and negative right?
               2. An eligible work does not require any form of registration for the author to

                   be conferred with copyright. However, certain requirements must be
                   satisfied under the Copyright before copyright can vest in an eligible work.
                   What are the requirements?

2.7 Summary
      We have discussed the subsistence of copyright and other qualifying factors for copyright
      protection under the Copyright Act. Adopting a comparative approach, we examined the
      notion of eligible works, nature and duration of eligible works, the concept of originality
      and fixation under the Copyright Act. We also highlighted and explained other factors
      that qualifies a work and its author for protection under the copyright Act. In this regard,
      we discussed issues around the status of the author, the place of first publication of a
      work, the work of government or an international body, and works protected by reference
      to international agreements under the Copyright Act.

                                                                                                                    70
2.8 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
        1) S Ghosh, "Market Entry and the Proper Scope of Copyright," International Journal of the
             Economics of Business, (2005) Vol. 12, No. 3: p.348
        2) Adebambo Adewopo, Nigerian Copyright System: Principles and Practice (Odade
             Publishers, 2012)
        3) IA Olubiyi, `Reciprocal extension of copyright and national treatment: Microsoft
             Corporation v Franike Associates Ltd (2014) 2 South African Intellectual Property Law
             Journal 98-108
        4) Adejoke Oyewunmi Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)
        5) Drassinower, A (2003-2004) "Sweat of the brow, creativity, and authorship: on originality
             in Canadian copyright law" 1 University of Ottawa Law and Technology Journal 105-123
        6) John O. Asein, Nigerian Copyright Law and Practice 2nd ed. (Books & Gavel Publishers,
             2012)
        7) Desmond Oriakhogba and Alero Fenemigho,2 `Development, concept and scope of
             copyright protection in Nigeria: An overview' (2014) 5 Nnamdi Azikiwe University Journal
             of International Law and Jurisprudence 179-191
        8) Ekpa, FO (2014) "The preconditions for copyright protection in Nigeria" 6(1) Kogi State
             University Bi-Annual Journal of Public Law 76-89
        9) Carpenter, M and Hetcher, S (2014) "Function over form: bringing the fixation
             requirement into the modern era" 82(5) Fordham Law Review 2221- 2271
        10) Perzanowski, AK (2010) "Fixing RAM copies" available at
             http://scholarlycommons.law.case.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article=1045&context=faculty
             _publications
        11) Ocheme, P (2000) The Law and Practice of Copyright in Nigeria.
        12) W Cornish and D Llewelyn, Intellectual Property: Patents, Copyright, Trademarks and
             Allied Rights (London: Sweet and Maxwell, 2007)
        13) CB Ncube and DO Oriakhogba `Monkey selfie and authorship in copyright law: the
             Nigerian and South African perspectives' (2018) 21 Potchefstroom Electronic Law
             Journal 1-35, http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/1727-3781/2018/v21i0a4979.
        14) DO Oriakhogba `The scope and standard of originality and fixation in Nigerian and South
             African copyright law' (2018) 2(2) African Journal of Intellectual Property 119-135.3
        15) Gervais, DJ (2002) `Feist goes global: A comparative analysis of the notion of originality
             in copyright law' Journal of the Copyright Society of the U. S. A. 949-981

2 Parts of this unit were drawn from excerpts of the paper.
3 Parts of this unit were drawn from excerpts of the paper

                                                                                                                     71
MODULE 2 PROTECTION OF COPYRIGHT AND RELATED RIGHTS

Unit 3: Authorship, Ownership and Transfer of Copyright

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Authorship
3.4 Joint Authorship
3.5 Ownership of Copyright
3.6 Transfer of Copyright
3.7 Summary
3.8 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

3.1 Introduction
       Authorship is an important concept in copyright jurisprudence. The notion of originality
       as a requirement for copyright subsistence rests on the existence of an author who is
       expected to exercise requisite the skill and labour in the creation of an eligible work.
       Indeed, the author is the foundation for copyright ownership and the reference point for
       copyright duration in most cases. A work may have a single author or joint authors, as
       the case may be. The idea of author envisages a natural or juristic person (corporate body)
       as such. The author or owner of the copyright in a work is empowered to transfer the
       copyright either by assignment, license (exclusive or non-exclusive), testamentary
       disposition or by operation of law. However, given the rise of digital technology, the
       notion of the author as a natural or juristic person is being challenged. In this Unit, we
       discuss the concept of authorship (and joint authorship), ownership and transfer of
       copyright under the Copyright Act.

3.2 Learning outcomes
       At the completion of this unit, you should be able to do the following:
           1) Explain the concept of authorship and determine whether a non-juristic or
                unnatural person can be an author under the Copyright Act.
           2) Explain the implications of the joint authorship under the Copyright Act.

                                                                                                                     72
          3) Determine who can claim ownership of copyright in respect of the eligible works
               under the Copyright Act.

          4) Determine when/how copyright can be transferred.

3.3 Authorship
      At some point in the evolution of copyright law, authorship was viewed as a process of
      inspiration or motivation of creativity by some forces on the author. It was seen as the
      expression of the author's personality and identity through the works produced by the
      author. According to this view, authors are geniuses who create works without drawing
      from the existing culture and knowledge in the society in which they live. However, the
      modern view sees authorship as a creative process that flows from facts, experiences and
      knowledge existing in the author's society. A discussion of the concept of authorship
      must of necessity involve answering the question: who is an author?

      The author is the foundation and the heart of modern copyright law. The subsistence and
      life span of copyright is determined by reference to the author. Entitlements to copyright
      are rooted in the author. The right to first and subsequent ownership of a work generally
      derives from the author. The author and owner of a copyright work are often the same
      person. The author is generally regarded as the first owner of a copyright work, but the
      author is not always the owner of a work. The distinction lies in the difference between
      one who expresses an idea in a material form and the other who invests in the trading of
      the material form in which an idea is expressed.

      There is no generally accepted answer to the author question. Although authors are
      recognised as the centrepiece of copyright protection at the international level, copyright
      treaties appear to reserve the author question for determination in national laws. Article
      7 of the Berne Convention recognises the author as the reference point for the
      determination of the duration for copyright protection. However, the Berne Convention
      merely states in Article 15 that the appearance of a person's name on a work is sufficient
      to regard such person as an author in order to cloth him/her with the entitlement to
      institute copyright infringement proceedings. WIPO attempted to answer the author
      question in 1990. WIPO's draft model copyright law attempted a definition, which would
      incorporate the divergent views of what would amount to authorship. Although the
      attempt failed due to disagreements among member states, the definition proffered by the

                                                                                                                    73
expert committee on the draft law provides some insights on answering the question.
According to the expert committee, an author is "the physical person who has created the
work. Reference to 'author' includes, in addition to the author, where applicable, also the
successors in title of the author and, where the original owner of the rights in the work is
a person other than the author, such person".

From a critical look at this definition, it would be easy to guess why WIPO's attempt
failed. First, it seems to conflate authorship with ownership by including successors in
title of the copyright in a work within the scope of its definition. One does not become
an author merely by being a successor in title to a deceased author. Authorship, as will
be shown shortly, requires some positive acts. Secondly, it also tends to include juristic
persons within its definitional scope without limiting the extent to which and the
particular works for which juristic persons may properly be clothed with authorship.
However, it appears the above definition formed the basis for the provisions in sections
12(3) and 13(5) of the Copyright Act. Those sections define authors to include their heirs
and successors-in-title for purposes of the enforcement of moral (section 12(3)) and
resale rights (section 13(5)) respectively.

Dean regards an author as a "person who is responsible for the creation of the material
embodiment" of a work through an activity, that involves the "application of intellectual
effort or skill". He contends further that while only natural persons can be regarded as
authors in relation to some works like literary, artistic and musical works, it is possible
to have juristic persons as authors in relation to cinematograph films and sound
recordings. This definition seems to accord with that of Asein, who believes that "the
author of a work is the person who created the work or made the production of the work
possible and he need not always be a human beneficiary". However, Ginsburg prefers to
look at author differently as follows:

       "an author is (or should be) a human creator who, notwithstanding the
       constraints of her task, succeeds in exercising minimal personal autonomy in
       her fashioning of the work. Because, and to the extent that, she moulds the
       work to her vision [...], she is entitled not only to recognition and payment,
       but to exert some artistic control over it".

                                                                                                              74
By Ginsburg's definition, there is no room for juristic persons in the definition of authors.
She takes this stance because according to her it would lead to considerable incoherence
as regarding juristic persons, as authors will mean equating authorship with ownership.

The Copyright Act does not generally define the term author but merely proffer pointers
on whom an author is in relation to particular works. Under the section 51(1) of the
Copyright Act, the author of a literary, artistic or musical work is the person who creates
the work. The section defines the author of a cinematographic film as the person who
arranges for the making of the film. However, the parties to the making of the film may,
by agreement, confer authorship on another person. Similarly, section 15(1) of the
Copyright Act defines author in respect of a sound recording to mean the person who
made arrangement for making of the sound recording. However, where the sound
recording is from a musical work, the author means the artist in whose name the recording
was made. According to Asein, "this is a pro-author provision" and it is aimed at
protecting a performer who is also the composer of the musical work contained in the
sound recording. In either case, the parties to the making of the sound recording may, by
agreement, confer authorship of the sound recording on a person who is neither the artist
nor made arrangement for making the sound recording. Furthermore, under section 51(1)
of the Copyright Act, the author of a broadcast means the person by whom arrangements
for the making of the broadcast or transmission were undertaken. Computer program is
protected under the Copyright Act as a literary work. Thus, the definition of author of a
literary work applies to computer programs in Nigeria.

The foregoing definitions still do not completely resolve the authorship question within
the Nigerian context. For instance, it seems easy to determine the author of a
cinematographic film or sound recording. This is so because arrangements for the making
of a cinematographic film or sound recording have been held to essentially relate to
financial arrangements (see Century Communications Ltd v Mayfair Entertainment UK
Ltd [1993] EMLR 335; Adventure Film Productions v Tully [1993] EMLR 376). Thus,
the person who makes financial arrangements will be regarded as the author of such
work. However, it would not be easy to determine how a person qualifies as a maker or
creator of a literary or musical work under the Copyright Act.

Indeed, the Copyright Act does not provide concrete criteria for a general definition of
the concept of authorship. However, it is clear from the definitions, and this is confirmed

                                                                                                              75
      by case law, that the authorship question is generally limited to natural and juristic
      persons (See David Feldman v EMI Music [2009] ZASCA 75; Haupt t/a Soft Copy v BMI
      (Pty) Ltd 2006 SCA 39). In addition, the authorship question is a matter of law and fact,
      and a copyist would not be regarded as an author (ICIC (Directory Publishers) Ltd v
      Ekko Delta (Nig) Ltd 1977-1989 2 IPLR 32). To be ascribed as an author, a person must
      show that the copyright work in question is original to him. The question of originality
      is already discussed above.

      The foregoing analysis is important as it helps us understand how to determine the
      authorship question. However, that question does not seem simple enough in the face of
      digitisation, which has given rise to the possibility of the creation of eligible works by
      artificial intelligence. This will be discussed in Module three below. It suffices now to
      note that the author question was at the heart of the famous Monkey Selfie case recently
      concluded in the US - Naruto v David Slater (case number 16-15469, ID: 10845881,
      DktEntry: 62-1 of 23 April 2018). In that case, an animal rights group ­ People for the
      Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) ­ attempted to enforce copyright on behalf of a
      monkey named Naruto in respect of a photograph accidentally taken by the Monkey
      when a professional photographer ­ David Slater ­ was on a photographing expedition
      in an Indonesian forest. The monkey clicked the shutter of the camera after the
      photographer had set it down and left it unattended. The US court, from trial to the
      appellate level, refused to confer copyright on the monkey because the concept of
      authorship under the US law (which is similar to Nigerian law) cannot be extended to
      unnatural and/or non-juristic persons.

3.4 Joint authorship
      In our discussion of the concept of authorship above, reference was made mainly to the
      author of a work as a single person. However, it is possible for an eligible work to be
      made or created by two or more persons who have exerted either equal or varying
      amounts of skill and labour to the production of the work. Under the Copyright Act, both
      persons or group of persons would be regarded as joint authors of that work. The concept
      of joint authors finds expression in section 51(1) of the Copyright Act under the
      definition of "work of joint authorship". Accordingly, a "work of joint authorship" means
      a work produced by the collaboration of two or more authors in which the contribution
      of each author is inseparable from the contribution of the other author or authors".

                                                                                                                    76
From the forgoing provision, for there to be joint authorship of a work, first, there must
be two or more persons who have collaborated or cooperated or worked jointly towards
producing the eligible work in question (see Beckingham v Hodgens [2003] All ER 247).
Secondly, the contribution towards production of the work of one of the persons must be
inseparable, indivisible, or indistinguishable from the those of the other persons. It is of
no moment if their contributions are equal or of varied degrees. Hadley v Kemp [1999]
EMLR 859, Bamgboye v Reed [2004] EMLR 5). However, contributors of mere general
ideas, facts, and direction; and those who acted as mere literary or research assistants or
constructive critics towards improving the quality of the work will not qualify as joint
authors for this purpose (Tate v Fullbrook [1908] 1 KB 821, Brighton v Jones [2005]
FSR 16).

It is important to note that it is possible to have a composite work, such as a musical work
comprising lyrics (literary work) and the rhythm (musical composition or work), in which
the component works (lyrics and rhythm) are created by different persons and in which
the contributors of the persons can be separable and distinguishable. Although, not
expressly provided under the definition of "work of joint authorship", such persons
would be regarded as "joint owners" under section 11(6) of the Copyright Act. Section
11(6) the Copyright Act stipulates that for purposes of transfer of copyright, persons shall
be deemed co-owners if they share a joint interest in the whole or any part of a copyright;
or if they have interests in the various copyrights in a composite production, that is to
say, a production consisting of two or more works. However, according to Oyewunmi, it
is not out of place to refer to such persons as co-authors in respect of the composite
works. Whatever the case may be, Asein has rightly posited that "joint authors do not
hold their interests as joint tenants but as tenants-in-common, with each of them having
the power to maintain an action against a stranger for an infringement of the entire
copyright". The effect of this, according to Asein, is that each joint author holds similar,

       "but independent interest in the copyright work and is able to authorise the use
       of work to third parties or to his successors without reference to [his/her joint
       authors]. In the event of the death intestate of one of the [joint authors], they
       being as tenants in common, the share of the deceased does not merge with that
       of his surviving partners but passes to his estate".

                                                                                                              77
      The foregoing accords with section 11(5) of the Copyright Act, which provides that an
      assignment or license granted by one copyright owner shall have effect as if granted by
      his co-owner also, and, subject to any contract between them, fees received by the
      grantors shall be divided equitably between all co-owners.

3.5 Ownership of Copyright
      Copyright ownership has both internal and external effects. The internal effect of
      copyright ownership reflects in the power of authors to control the integrity of their works
      and benefit from their exploitation. On the other hand, the external effect is manifest in
      the ability to control the manufacture and distribution of a copyright work, which in turn
      attracts investments and helps to optimise the economic benefits from exploitation of the
      work.
      The inquiry into the concept of copyright ownership would lead to an analysis of the
      Copyright Act. This is so because these statutes determine the extent of ownership of
      copyright in a work. Even so, as has now been already over-flogged, the author is
      generally vested with first ownership of copyright in a work (section 10(1) of the
      Copyright Act). However, in the case of cinematograph film or sound recording, the
      author is obliged to conclude, prior to making of the work, written contracts with all those
      whose works are to be used in making such cinematograph film or sound recording. That
      being said, every other person derives ownership from the author. Ownership may be
      vested by agreement in form of assignments, and exclusive or non-exclusive licenses
      between the author and the subsequent owner. Also, ownership of copyright may pass by
      way of succession: that is from the author to the beneficiaries of his estate (section 11 of
      the Copyright Act).

      Furthermore, ownership may vest depending on the relationship between the author and
      the person deriving ownership from the author. Such relationship may be that of
      employer/employee or commissioner/independent contractor. In such circumstances, the
      vesting of ownership varies from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. For instance, the Anglo-
      American approach is to vest ownership of works created by an author in the course of
      his employment or in the course of carrying out a commissioned work, on the author's
      employer or the person who commissioned the work, except where the author has agreed
      otherwise with his employer or the person who commissioned the work as the case may
      be (for instance, see section 11 UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988; section

                                                                                                                    78
201 US Copyright Act 17; sections 35(5) and (6) Australian Copyright Act No. 63 of
1968; and section 13(3) Canadian Copyright Act, c. C-42, RSC 1985). Historically,
Nigeria used to adopt the Anglo-American approach as seen in section 9 of the defunct
Copyright Decree of 1970 (see Sonora Gentil v Tabansi Agencies Ltd [1977-1989] 2
IPLR 1-31; Joseph Ikhuoria v Campaign Services Ltd & Anor. [1977-1989] 2 IPLR 316-
335).

It may be said that in the jurisdictions with this approach, placing ownership of copyright
in works made in the course of employment or pursuant to a commission on the employer
or commissioning party seems to be the general rule. The justification of this approach
may be found in the presumption that in such circumstances, the employer or
commissioning party is the person who bears the risks involved in the creation,
production, aggregation, marketing and presentation of the work and, as such, should be
conferred with ownership. However, Asein has dismissed the approach as unfair to the
author because it "goes against the spirit of creativity and could result in a veiled rip-off
on the author who is supposed [...] to be the primary object of the protection provided by
the copyright system". Even so, According to Dean, the approach does not affect the
moral rights of authors; neither does it change the fact that subsistence of copyright must
be determined in relation to the author.

The extant position in Nigeria is different from the Anglo-American approach. Here, the
pre-eminence of the author as far as copyright ownership goes seems to be maintained.
Put differently, author-ownership of copyright seems to be the general rule under the
Copyright Act. Accordingly, in Nigeria, ownership of copyright in both commissioned
works and works authored in the course of employment vests in the author. The author
may waive this right by a written stipulation in the contract between him and his
employer or the party commissioning the work (section 10(2) of the Copyright Act).

Apart from the foregoing distinction, Nigeria has similar approach with other common
law countries, such as South Africa, on the ownership of copyright in literary, musical or
artistic works published in newspapers, magazines and periodicals. In such
circumstances, the proprietor of the newspaper, magazine or periodical is conferred with
the ownership of the copyright in the work in so far as the copyright relates to publication
of the work in any newspaper, magazine or similar periodical or to reproduction of the
work for the purpose of its being so published, but in all other respects the author shall

                                                                                                              79
      be the owner of any copyright subsisting in the work (see section 10(3) of the Copyright
      Act. See Peter Obe v. Grapevine Communications Ltd. [2003-2007] 5 IPLR 354-384).
      Another similarity shared by the copyright systems of both countries relates to the
      ownership of copyright works created under the direction or control of the government
      or prescribed international bodies. In such circumstances, ownership of copyright vests
      in the government of the respective countries or the particular prescribed international
      body as the case may be (section 10(5) of the Copyright Act).

3.6 Transfer of Copyright
      Copyright is regarded as moveable property under the Copyright Act. As such, copyright
      is transmissible or transferable by the copyright owner through assignment, license
      (exclusive and non-exclusive), by testamentary disposition or by operation of law. An
      assignment or exclusive license must be in writing for it to be effective. But a non-
      exclusive license need not be in writing as it may be oral or inferred from contract. In
      terms of the Copyright Act, an assignment, license or testamentary disposition of
      copyright may be in respect of the whole copyright in the eligible work. Such assignment,
      license or testamentary disposition may be limited to apply to some of the rights (public
      performance, reproduction, publication, etc.) covered by the copyright, to a specific time,
      to a specific country or geographical area. Further, the assignment, license or
      testamentary disposition may be granted over a future work or an existing work in which
      copyright does not yet subsist and the prospective copyright in such work will be
      transmissible by operation of law. Concerning testamentary dispositions, the Copyright
      Act provides a presumption of transfer of copyright or prospective copyright in a work
      where the material embodying the work is transferred by testamentary disposition
      without any contrary indication by the testator (generally, see section 10 of the Copyright
      Act).

                                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6

          1) With the aid digital technology, machines and non-human animals would qualify
              as authors under the Copyright Act. Do you agree?

          2) Apart from the author of an eligible work, no other person can claim ownership of
              the work. Is this a correct assertion?

                                                                                                                    80
3.7 Summary
       We have examined the concept of authorship under the Copyright Act. Drawing from
       case law in other jurisdiction, such as the US, we found that only natural and juristic
       persons can be regarded as author under the Copyright Act. Further, the point was made
       that depending on the nature of the work in question, an author under the Copyright may
       be regarded as the person who exerted the requisite skill and labour in the making of the
       work or the person who made both the financial and material requirement for the making
       of the work. We also made the point that in some cases, two or more persons may be
       joint authors in respect of a work. The notion of ownership and when/ how may lay
       claims to ownership of copyright was equally discussed. The unit also examined transfer
       of copyright under the Copyright Act.

3.8 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
       1) CB Ncube and DO Oriakhogba4 `Monkey selfie and authorship in copyright
            law: the Nigerian and South African perspectives' (2018) 21 Potchefstroom
            Electronic Law Journal 1-35, http://dx.doi.org/10.17159/1727-
            3781/2018/v21i0a4979.
       2) W Cornish "The Author as Risk-sharer" 2002 CJLA 2-16
       3) RS Kwall "Originality in Context" 2007 Hous L Rev 871-899
       4) WIPO Draft Model Law on Copyright (1990)
       5) OH Dean Handbook of South African Copyright Law (Juta Cape Town 2015)
       6) JO Asein "Redefinition of First Ownership under Nigerian Copyright Law ­
            Lessons from an Inchoate Mutation" 2007 IIC 299-315
       7) JC Ginsburg "The Concept of Authorship in Comparative Copyright Law"
            2003 DePaul L Rev 1063-1092
       8) D Nimmer "Copyright in the Dead Sea Scrolls: Authorship and Originality"
            2001 Hous L Rev 1-222
       9) Asein JO Nigerian Copyright Law and Practice (Books and Gavel Abuja
            2012)

      10) A Guadamuz "The Monkey Selfie: Copyright Lessons for Originality in
            Photographs and Internet Jurisdiction" 2016 IP Review 1-2

4 Parts of this Unit were drawn from the paper.

                                                                                                                     81
      11) J Seignette "Authorship, Copyright Ownership and Works Made on
            Commission and Under Employment" in Hugenholtz B et al (eds) A Century of
            Dutch Copyright Law: Auteurswet 1912-2012 (deLex Amsterdam 2012) 115-
            140

      12) J Campbell 2006 Authorship, Incentives for Creation, and Copyright in the
            Digital 21st Century http://eprints.rclis.org/8569/1/Campbell_ASIST_06_
            final.pdf

      13) A Guadamuz 2018 Can the Monkey Selfie Case Teach Us Anything about
            Copyright Law? http://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2018/01/article
            _0007.html

      14) M Pavis 2017 The Selfie Monkey Case: The End?
            http://ipkitten.blogspot.co.za/2017/09/the-selfie-monkey-case-end.html

      15) Adejoke Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press,
            2015)

      16) Adebambo Adewopo, Nigerian Copyright System: Principles and
            Perspectives (Odade Publishers, 2012)

      17) A Ng "Authors and Readers: Conceptualizing Authorship in Copyright Law"
            2008 Hastings Comm & Ent LJ 377-418

      18) DO Oriakhogba5 "Authorship, Ownership and Enforcement of Copyright: The
            Nigerian Situation" 2015 SAIPLJ 40-54

5 Parts of this Unit were drawn from the paper.
                                                                                                                     82
MODULE 3 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT IN NIGERIA

Unit 1: Copyright Infringement and Enforcement

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Copyright Infringement and Enforcement

       1.3.1 Infringement of Copyright
       1.3.2 Enforcement of Copyright
1.4 Summary
1.5 References for Further Reading

1.1 Introduction
       Under the Copyright Act, an owner, assignee or exclusive licensee of copyright is entitled
       to bring an action for damages, injunctions, accounts, or other such reliefs as are available
       to owners of other proprietary rights, for infringement of copyright. The court vested
       with jurisdiction on such matters in Nigeria is the Federal High Court exercising
       jurisdiction at the place where the infringement is alleged to have occurred (sections 16
       and 46 of the Copyright Act).

1.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the completion of your study in this unit, you should be able to do the following:
           1. Identify and explain when copyright is said to have been infringed upon and when
                a copyright owner's right of action accrues under the Copyright Act
           2. Highlight and explain the civil remedies available to the copyright owner in
                copyright infringement suit under the Copyright Act
           3. Explain the criminal remedies available against copyright infringement under the
                Copyright Act.

1.3 Copyright Infringement and Enforcement
       1.3.1 Infringement of Copyright
              Infringement of copyright is said to occur where any person, without the license or
              authorisation of the owner, does or causes any other person to do an act, the doing
              of which is controlled by copyright; imports or causes to be imported into Nigeria

                                                                                                                     83
any copy of a work which, if it had been made in Nigeria, would be an infringing
copy under the Copyright Act; exhibits in public any copyright infringing article;
distributes by way of trade, offers for sale, hire or otherwise or for any purpose
prejudicial to the owner of the copyright, any copyright infringing article; makes
or has in their possession plates, master tapes, machines, equipment or contrivances
used for the purpose of making infringed copies of copyrighted works; permits a
place of public entertainment or of business to be used for a performance in the
public of the copyrighted work, where the performance constitutes an infringement
of the copyright, unless the person permitting the place to be so used was not aware,
and had no reasonable ground for suspecting that the performance would be an
infringement of the copyright; or performs or causes to be performed, for the
purposes of trade or business, any work in which copyright subsists (generally, see
section 15 of the Copyright Act. For infringement of performers rights, see section
28 and 29 of the Copyright Act. For expressions of folklore, see section 32 of the
Copyright Act).

Although there are generally not many judicial activities bordering on the copyright
system in Nigeria, there appears to be a plethora of cases where an owner's right
of action for infringement of copyright has been examined (for instance, see
Ukaoha v Broad-Based Mortgage Finance Ltd (1997) FHCLR 477; Ifeanyi Okoye
v Prompter Quality Services (1996) FHCLR 814; Masterpiece Investments Ltd v
Worldwide Business Media Ltd (1977) FHCLR 496; Plateau Publishing Ltd v
Adophy (1986) 4 NWLR (Pt. 34) 205; Island Records Ltd v Pandum Technical
Sales and Services Ltd (1993) FHCLR 318; Married Media Ltd v Lawrence Akapa
(1990-1997) 3 IPLR 202).

There is the very instructive court of appeal case of Adenuga v Ilesanmi ((1991) 5
NWLR (Pt. 189) 82). In that case, the appellant, as plaintiff at the high court,
claimed damages for infringement of his book titled "West African School
Certificate Examination: Objective Chemistry", an order for delivery up of all
copies of the said book, which were in the respondent's possession, and an
injunction restraining the respondent from reproducing or authorising the
reproduction of his book. The appellant's case was that in 1977 he submitted the
manuscript of the book to the respondent for printing. Although there was no

                                                                                                       84
       written agreement between them in relation to publication of the book, he
       discovered during 1980 that the respondent had published the book and copies of
       it were being sold to members of the public. However, there was evidence of a
       letter written to the respondent by the appellant asking for royalties. The trial judge,
       dismissing the appellant's claim, held that it could be inferred from his conduct
       that he had given a non-exclusive license to the respondent to publish the book,
       hence an appeal was lodged. The court of appeal, after considering relevant
       provisions under the defunct 1970 Decree, allowed the appeal and thereby upheld
       the right of the appellant to enforce his copyright in the work.

       The plaintiff did not succeed in the recent case of Raconteur Productions Limited
       v. Dioni Visions Entertainment Limited and Others (Suit No. FHC/L/CS/740/2017
       delivered 2 May 2019). In that case, the plaintiff claimed copyright in the
       screenplay (literary work) of the popular Nollywood movie: "Okafor Law". In
       summary, the plaintiff's case was that the screenplay used by the defendants in its
       movie (Okafor Law) was a copy of a similar screenplay it (the plaintiff) acquired
       from a third party. The plaintiff had initially successfully obtained an ex parte
       injunction against the release of the movie. The injunction was eventually vacated
       by the court in the course of the trial for the perpetual injunction and damages
       claimed by the plaintiff. After hearing of the parties, the court dismissed the
       plaintiff's claim for lack of merit. According to Okorie, what "foiled the finding of
       copyright infringement and the granting of the claims for general damages was the
       absence of any physical or documentary evidence of the allegedly infringed
       screenplay. The Court stated that in the absence of the plaintiff tendering the
       allegedly infringed work in evidence during trial, there was no basis upon which a
       consideration of the evidence and arguments of infringement may be made".

1.3.2 Enforcement of Copyright
       Where infringement of a copyright is proved to have been committed by an
       employee in the course of their employment, the position is that the employer, as
       well as the employee who committed the act, are both liable. In such a situation,
       the copyright owner has the right to sue both or either of them (American Motion
       Picture Export Co. (Nig) Ltd v Minnesota (Nig) Ltd (1981) FHCLR 64). Further,
       where an action for infringement of copyright brought by the copyright owner or

                                                                                                              85
an exclusive licensee relates to an infringement, in respect of which they have
concurrent rights of action, the copyright owner or the exclusive licensee may not,
without the leave of court, proceed with the action unless the other is either joined
as a plaintiff or added as a defendant (section 16 of the Copyright Act). It should
also be noted that where, in an action for copyright infringement, an infringement
was proved or admitted, but with the excuse that at the time of the infringement the
defendant was not aware and had no reasonable grounds for suspecting that
copyright subsisted in the work to which the action relates, the plaintiff shall not
be entitled to damages, but to an account of profits in respect of the infringement
against the defendant (section 16 of the Copyright Act). It appears that in such
circumstances, the plaintiff will, in addition to an account, be entitled to an
injunction (Plateau Publishing Ltd v Adophy, supra). But no injunction shall be
issued in a copyright infringement suit which requires a completed or partly
completed building to be demolished or prevents the completion of a partly
completed building (section 16 of the Copyright Act).

Under the Copyright Act, the owner's right of action for infringement of copyright
exists, whether the infringement was intentional, malicious or innocent; whether
the right to property is real or personal, corporeal or incorporeal. It has been held
that the defence of innocent infringement recognised under the Copyright Act
(section 16(3)) is not for the publisher of the infringing material, but for the author
of the infringing material. In an action for infringement of copyright, there is no
need to prove actual or specific damages as the issue of damages flows from the
fact of infringement. The fact that a defendant is facing criminal prosecution for
infringement of copyright does not prevent an owner from instituting a civil action
against the defendant in respect of the infringement. This is so because under the
Copyright Act, criminal and civil suits can run simultaneously in respect of an
infringement (section 24 of the Copyright Act, Plateau Publishing Ltd v Adophy,
supra). As a matter of law, upon proof or admission of infringement and if the court
is not satisfied that effective relief would otherwise be available to the plaintiff,
and having regard to the flagrancy of the infringement and the benefits that have
accrued to the defendant by reason of the infringement, the court, in assessing
damages for the infringement, shall have the power to award such additional
damages as it may consider appropriate in the circumstances (section 16 of the

                                                                                                       86
Copyright Act). According to Babafemi, the courts have, in exercising this power,
awarded exemplary and punitive damages. It should also be noted that copyright
infringement also constitutes a criminal offence that is liable to be punished on
conviction by fine or imprisonment or both (sections 20, 30 and 33 of the Copyright
Act).

For purposes of proof in an infringement action, the Copyright Act raises some
presumptions in favour of the copyright owner. Thus, in the absence of any
evidence to the contrary, it is presumed that copyright subsists in a work which is
the subject matter of an alleged infringement; that the plaintiff is the owner of the
copyright in the work; that the name appearing on a work purporting to be the name
of the author is the name of such author; that the name appearing on a work
purporting to be that of the publisher or producer of a work is the name of such
publisher or producer; where the author is dead, that the work is an original work;
and that it was published or produced at the place and on the date appearing on the
work (section 43 of the Copyright Act).

The interest of the owners of copyright is further fortified by the powers vested in
them to take proceedings for recovery of possession of pirated copies, among
others, of their work. For this purpose, all infringing copies of any work in which
copyright subsists, or of any substantial part thereof, and all plates, master tapes,
machines, equipment or contrivances used, or intended to be used for the
production of such infringing copies, shall be deemed to be the property of the
owner of the copyright (section 18 of the Copyright Act).

In addition, the Copyright Act makes provisions for the granting of a conservatory
order in the form of an Anton Piller injunction. This is expressed in section 25 of
the Copyright Act, which empowers the courts to grant a copyright owner an order,
ex parte, to enter the premises or house of the defendant for inspection,
photography and seizure of the infringing materials in the possession and control
of the defendant. Accordingly, in an action for infringement of copyright, where
an application supported by affidavit is made to the court that there is reasonable
cause for suspecting that there is in any house or premises any infringing copy or
any plate, film or contrivance used or intended to be used for making infringing

                                                                                                       87
             copies or capable of being used for the purposes of making copies or any other
             article, book or document by means of or in relation to which any infringement has
             been committed, the court may issue an order upon such terms as it deems just,
             authorising the applicant to enter the house or premises at any reasonable time by
             day or night, accompanied by a police officer not below the rank of an Assistant
             Superintendent of Police and to seize, detain and preserve any such copy or
             contrivance; and inspect all or any documents in the custody or under the control
             of the defendant relating to the action. It should be noted, however, that if an owner
             of copyright gives false information to the court in order to obtain an order, he or
             she will be guilty of an offence and on conviction be liable to a fine of one thousand
             naira (1,000).

             The foregoing provision has its roots in the often cited English case of Anton Piller
             KG v Manufacturing Processes Ltd ((1976) 1 All ER 789), wherein their lordships
             laid down the conditions for the granting of the order as follows: (a) that the
             plaintiff must show a very good prima facie case; (b) that the damage, actual or
             potential, to the plaintiff must be extremely serious; and (c) that there must be clear
             evidence that the defendant(s) had in their possession incriminating documents or
             things and there is a real possibility of destruction of such materials if they are put
             on notice.

                                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7
                     What are the available remedies for copyright infringement under the
                     Copyright Act?

1.4 Summary
      In this unit, we have discussed when and how copyright infringement may occur under
      the Copyright Act the remedies available to the copyright owner. When copyright
      infringement occurs, the owner may pursue a civil claim for damages, injunctions,
      accounts, delivery up and preservatory reliefs such as the Anton Piller injunction. The
      owner may choose to report the case to the NCC for criminal prosecution. However,
      nothing stops both a civil and criminal trial from running concurrently in respect of a
      single infringement claim.

                                                                                                                    88
1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
     1) Chijioke Okorie `Lessons in protecting and enforcing copyright in screenplays in
         Nigeria' (2020) 42(2) Business Law review 55-62
     2) FO Babafemi, Intellectual Property: The Law and Practice of Copyright Trade
         Mark, Patent and Industrial design in Nigeria (Justinian Books Ltd, 2007)
     3) Adejoke Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)
     4) John O Asein, Nigerian Copyright Law and Practice (Books and Gavel, 2012)
     5) Adebambo Adewopo, Nigerian Copyright System: Principles and Perspectives
         (Odade Publishers, 2012)
     6) Desmond O Oriakhogba `Authorship, ownership and enforcement of copyright: the
         Nigerian situation' (2015) 3 South African Intellectual Property Law Journal 40-54

                                                                                                                    89
MODULE 3 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT IN NIGERIA

Unit 2: Exceptions to Copyright

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Exceptions to Copyright

     2.3.1 Fair Dealing (and Fair Use)
     2.3.2 Persons with Disabilities
     2.3.3 Use by Government, Public Libraries and Archives
     2.3.4 Educational Use
     2.3.5 Other Exceptions
2.4 Summary/Conclusion
2.5 References for Further Reading

2.1 Introduction
       Exceptions to copyright are creations of copyright legislation in favour of copyright
       users. The exceptions are regard as users' rights in some quarters because of the
       balancing role, which copyright law is meant to play between authors' rights to a just
       reward and public interest for the promotion of creativity, culture and social welfare. The
       argument is that for copyright law to effectively play this role, copyright exceptions
       should be regarded as users' rights. Nonetheless, copyright exceptions under the
       Copyright Act have been regarded by Adewopo as defences, which users of copyright
       works may put up or plead in a claim for copyright infringement by copyright holders.
       Whether viewed as user rights or defences, exceptions to copyright are important in that
       they have been regarded as tools for striking the required balance between the rights of
       copyright owners and public interest. Research show that the more open and flexible they
       are, the more they contribute to developing high technology industries and scholarly
       publication.

       Copyright exceptions are part of major international copyright treaties like the Berne
       Convention and TRIPs agreement. While the Berne Convention contains minor
       exception provisions (Article 10 of the Berne Convention), it generally set basic
       principles or standards that national legislatures may consider when making exception

                                                                                                                     90
      provisions in their respective copyright laws. These basic principles, widely known as
      the `three-step test', are also meant to serve as guide in the interpretation and application
      of exception provisions. Accordingly, exceptions to copyright should be allowed in (a)
      certain special cases that (b) do not conflict with the normal commercial exploitation of
      the copyright work and (c) do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
      copyright holder (article 9(2) of the Berne Convention; article 13 of the TRIPs
      Agreement; article 10 of the WIPO Copyright Treaty 1996).

      The Copyright Act provides a number of copyright exceptions, to which we turn shortly
      below. It suffices, however to note at this point that the exceptions, which are mainly
      contained in the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act, are introduced by sections 6(1),
      7(2) and 8(3). Gleaned from those sections, while all the exceptions in the Second
      Schedule apply to literary, music, artistic and cinematograph works with equal force,
      only those contained in paragraphs (a), (h), (k), (l) and (p) apply to sound recordings.
      Also, only those contained in paragraphs (a), (h), (k), (n) and (o) apply to broadcasts. The
      rationale for banishing the copyright exceptions to the schedule of the Copyright Act is
      unclear. Nonetheless, it does not detract from the legal force of the exceptions contained
      therein. It is trite that provisions in a schedule are of equal legal force as the provisions
      in the main body of an Act. Finally, special exceptions in respect of sound recordings of
      a musical works are contained in the Third Schedule to the Copyright Act, while those
      relating to compulsory licenses are found in the Fourth Schedule. We shall focus on the
      exceptions contained in the Second Schedule.

2.2 Learning outcomes
      At the end of the study in this Unit, you should be able to do the following:
          1) Identify and explain the exceptions to copyright or defences to copyright
               infringement suit under the Copyright Act.

2.3 Exceptions to Copyright
      2.3.1 Fair Dealing (and Fair Use)
             Although there is no specific international standard concerning fair dealing and fair
             use exceptions, it has been rightly argued that ­ with proper adjustment to fit local
             milieu ­ the three-step test can guide interpretation and application of the
             exceptions, especially in countries, such as Nigeria, where their fair dealing

                                                                                                                    91
provisions have not properly developed. Fair dealing and fair use are the most
widely adopted copyright exceptions. They are regarded as affirmative defence to
an allegation of copyright infringement. They enable copying without the
copyright-holder's consent in certain, limited circumstances. The exceptions are
fundamentally based on the belief that not all copying should be banned,
particularly in socially important endeavours such as criticism, news reporting,
teaching, and research, etc. They are regarded as capable of safeguarding the
fundamental rights of free speech and freedom of expression in a democratic
society.

Fair dealing and fair use are statutory enactments of the common law fair use
doctrine developed by English courts as equitable rule of reason. The common law
doctrine of fair use is enacted in the US Copyright Act, 17 USC (USCA). Under
section 107 of the USCA "the fair use of a copyrighted work, including such use
by reproduction in copies [...] for purposes such as criticism, comment, news
reporting, teaching [...] is not an infringement of copyright". This fair use provision
is generally viewed as an open-ended flexible regime, which allows courts to
determine ­ on a case-by-case basis ­ what qualifies as fair use within certain
criteria fixed by the USCA and developed by US courts. In other words, uses of a
copyright work that may qualify as fair use are not limited to those mentioned in
the provision. Other countries with similar fair use provision as those of the US
include Israel, Taiwan, Malaysia, Singapore and the Philippines.

On the other hand, UK enacted the doctrine as fair dealing with seemingly rigid
and restrictive and close-ended effect. Under sections 29 and 30 of the UK
Copyright, Designs and Patent Act, 1988 (CDPA), purposes falling within the
purview of the fair dealing defence are research for non-commercial purpose and
private study, criticism or review and reporting current events. The position in the
UK is that only purposes enumerated in the CDPA as fair dealing can qualify as
such. A UK judge held that fair dealing "is the dealing which is fair for the
approved purposes and not dealing which might be fair for some other purpose or
fair in general". The judge also declared that "public interest as such is outside the
purpose of [...] fair dealing. It is not of itself justification for infringement of
copyright" (Ungoed Thomas J in Beloff v Pressdram [1973] 1 All E. R. 241).

                                                                                                       92
However, the English courts appear to have adopted a liberal approach in
construing the fair dealing purposes enumerated in the CDPA and in so doing, they
are applying an objective test, which have made it reasonably easy to prove that
some dealing fits in one of the enumerated purposes (for instance, see Hubbard v
Vosper [1972] 2 QB 82, PSM AG v Carlton Television Ltd [1998] FSR 43,
Ashdown v Telegraph [2002] Ch. 149). Although the UK fair dealing provision is
inflexible, its strength lies in its certainty as to the purposes that fall within its
ambit. As will be seen shortly, Nigeria have similar fair dealing provisions with the
UK. The same is true of Canada, where their Supreme Court recently held, in the
case of CCH Canadian Ltd v Law Society (supra), that the fair dealing provision
in section 29 of the Canadian Copyright Act should not be construed restrictively
and that the enumerated purposes should be accorded large and liberal
interpretation. Section 40 of the Australian Copyright Act (No. 63 of 1968), which
is modelled after the UK fair dealing, goes further to include similar factors as the
USCA (fair use) in determining what is fair in a copyright litigation involving the
defence of fair dealing in Australia. The factors include (a) the purpose and
character of the use; (b) the nature of the work; (c) the amount and substantiality
of the portion of the work used; (d) the effect of the use on the copyright's holder's
potential market; and in the case of Australia alone, (e) the possibility of obtaining
the work within a reasonable time and at an ordinary commercial price (section 107
of the USCA and section 40(2) of the Australian Copyright Act). The Australian
fair dealing provisions, like its UK counterpart, are still interpreted as a close-ended
regime allowing only the fair dealing purposes provided for by the Australian
Copyright Act. However, it can be distinguished from the UK fair dealing on the
ground that while the factors to be considered when determining fairness of a use
is left to the courts in UK, the Australian legislators have made provisions for such
factors. The Australian fair dealing may be regarded as a hybrid fair dealing:
exhaustive in fair dealing purposes yet liberal in the factors to be considered in
determining fairness.

One major merit of fair use is its flexibility and adaptability. Such that it can be
applied to instances not mentioned in the law in so far as such instances fits within
the spectrum of the expressly mentioned uses (ejus dem generis) and what is fair
in the circumstance. This flexibility makes it possible to apply the doctrine to

                                                                                                       93
modern use of copyright works made possible by growth in computer technology
and the Internet. Thus, according to Katz, it will allow the unauthorised use of
copyright works "in a manner that promotes the public interest in the
encouragement and dissemination of works of the arts and intellect, when the [use]
does not seriously undermine the copyright owner's opportunity to obtain a just
reward".

Fair dealing lacks such flexibility. Another merit of fair use, according to
Samuelson, is that "it is a concept ordinary people can understand" thereby easily
discerning what is "fair and unfair uses" and adapting their behaviour accordingly.
Also, fair use "can avert a proliferation of specific exemptions that can make
copyright laws read like the tax code" and also saves legislative time that may be
used in amending copyright laws to include possible instances to existing fair
dealing list. Further, "fair use engenders respect for copyright law, for it avoids
the rigidity that grants of exceptionally broad rights, tempered only by a few
exceptions, can cause". Despite these merits, the greatest disadvantage of the fair
use exception is that it sacrifices certainty of fair use purposes on the altar of
uncertainty as to what use can come within its ambit. This may result in an
unbridled fair use regime, which would greatly prejudice the interest of copyright
owners. It is this certainty of purpose that the fair dealing variant brings that seems
to make it attractive to protectionist jurisdictions and those without a developed
copyright enforcement framework, such as Nigeria.

Fair dealing provision in Nigeria is contained in paragraph (a) of the Second
Schedule to the Copyright Act. That paragraph states that the right conferred in
respect of a work by section 6 of this Copyright Act does not include the right to
control the doing of any of the acts mentioned in the said section 6 by way of fair
dealing for purposes of research, private use, criticism or review or the reporting
of current events, subject to the condition that, if the use is public, it shall be
accompanied by an acknowledgment of the title of the work and its authorship
except where the work is incidentally included in a broadcast.

The above provisions apply only to rights conferred in respect of a work by section
6 of the Copyright Act. The section relates to literary, musical, artistic works and

                                                                                                       94
cinematograph film. This gives the impression that the fair dealing exception
applies only to those works. But a deeper peek into the Copyright Act will reveal
that the fair dealing exception also applies to sound recordings and broadcasts. The
fair dealing exceptions will apply only to uses for the purposes mentioned in the
said paragraph (a) and not for any other purpose. In other words, the Copyright Act
fair dealing is close-ended. Provision is not made in paragraph (a) of factors to be
considered when determining whether the use of a work for any of the enumerated
purposes is fair. Neither is fair dealing defined anywhere in the Copyright Act. It
appears the lawmakers have left this task for the courts. Where a court has
determined that a use is for any of the enumerated purposes and that such use is
fair, the court still has a further duty. If a work is used publicly for any of the listed
purposes, the court shall consider whether its title and authorship are
acknowledged. The exception to this condition is when the work is accidentally
included in a broadcast.

The Copyright Act fair dealing shares similarity with that of the UK CDPA. The
Copyright Act fair dealing has not attracted much judicial attention. According to
Ekpa and Kure, this may be because the fair dealing defence is rarely raised in
Nigeria. Academic literature on the subject have relied on the UK jurisprudence in
interpreting the specific fair dealing purposes listed in the Copyright Act and
majorly on the US jurisprudence in finding out when a use can be termed fair. This
approach does not seem alien. India has similar fair dealing provision as the
Copyright Act (see section 52 of the Indian Copyright Act, 1956). The emerging
jurisprudence on fair dealing from India shows similar trend of reliance on the UK
and US jurisprudence in the interpretation and application of the fair dealing
exception. Thus, Nigerian courts may adopt similar approach.

However, an opportunity to interpret the Copyright Act fair dealing was botched
by the Federal High Court in the case of Obe v. Grapevine Communications Ltd
([2003-2007] 5 IPLR 354-384). In that case, the defendant published a picture from
the plaintiff's book titled "Nigeria: A Decade of Crisis in Pictures" which was
essentially, a photo documentary about the Nigerian Civil War. When sued for
copyright infringement, the defendant contended, among others, that the
photographs were used "to depict a story of a historical matter of importance and

                                                                                                       95
       of high public interest". The defendant thus claimed the copyright exception of fair
       dealing. The defendant further asserted that it adequately acknowledged the
       disputed photograph in the following terms. The court failed to consider whether
       the use of the photograph is for any of the purposes enumerated in paragraph (a)
       and if so, whether such use qualified as fair dealing. Instead, the court went straight
       to consider the ancillary issue of the acknowledgement of the photograph by the
       defendant and concluded that there was no proper acknowledgement. Based on
       this, the court held that the defence of fair dealing would have availed the defendant
       if it had adequately acknowledged the photograph as required by paragraph (a).
       Asein rightly criticized the judgment as follows:

            "the fundamental issue of whether the defendant's use qualified, in the
            first place as fair dealing should have been the paramount issue for
            consideration; the question of adequate acknowledgment being only of
            secondary importance. The court should have pronounced that there is no
            such defence as fair dealing based on historical importance or high public
            interest and that the defendants did not establish use of the photograph
            under any of the four activities specifically mentioned in that paragraph".

2.3.2 Persons with Disabilities
       Marrakesh Treaty to Facilitate Access to Published Works for Persons Who Are
       Blind, Visually Impaired, or Otherwise Print Disabled, 2013 (Marrakesh VIP
       treaty) is the international normative framework for copyright access enabling
       provisions for persons with disabilities. The Marrakesh VIP treaty came into force
       June 2016. It was envisioned to align with the human rights principles stipulated in
       the United Nations Declaration on Human Rights (UNDHR) and the Convention
       on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (UNCRPD). These human rights
       principles include civil and socio-economic rights, such as the right to education
       and information, the right to freedom from discrimination, among others. The
       Marrakesh VIP treaty requires member states to introduce a standard set of
       limitations and exceptions to copyright rules in order to permit reproduction,
       distribution and making available of literary and artistic works in formats designed
       to be accessible to the blind, visually impaired and otherwise print disabled persons
       (VIPs), and to permit exchange of these works across borders by organisations that
       serve the interest of VIPs (see articles 1-12 of the Marrakesh VIP treaty).

                                                                                                              96
Before the adoption and coming into force of the Marrakesh VIP treaty, however,
Nigeria already enacted copyright exceptions for use of eligible works by persons
with disability. In this connection, paragraph (s) of the Second Schedule to the
Copyright Act allows the "reproduction of published works in braille for the
exclusive use of the blind, and sound recordings made by institutions and other
establishments approved by the Government for the promotion of the welfare of
other disabled persons for the exclusive use of such blind or disabled persons".

To bring the Copyright Act in tune with the Marrakesh VIP treaty and other WIPO
internet treaties, which Nigeria ratified in 2017, the Draft Copyright Bill (DCB)
proposes some special exceptions that will also be applicable in the digital
environment. The exceptions include the Marrakesh VIP treaty-style exceptions
for the blind and VIPs proposed in clause 22 of the DCB. Among others, Clause
22 seeks to permit, without authorisation from the author or copyright owner, the
making, procurement and supply of accessible format copy of a copyright work for
the benefit of the blind, visually impaired or otherwise print disabled, or persons
who "are otherwise unable, through physical disability, to hold or manipulate a
book or to focus or move the eyes to the extent that would be normally acceptable
for reading; regardless of any other disabilities". Such making, procurement and
supply may be done by any means, including by non-commercial lending or by
electronic communication by wire or wireless means, subject to the following
conditions:

    1) the person wishing to undertake the said activity has lawful access to that
        work or subject matter, or a copy of that work or subject matter;

    2) the work or subject matter is converted to an accessible format copy, which
        may include any means needed to navigate information in the accessible
        format, but does not introduce changes other than those needed to make the
        work accessible to the beneficiary person;

    3) such accessible format copies are supplied exclusively to be used by
        beneficiary persons;

    4) the activity is undertaken on a non-profit basis; and
    5) indication of the source and the name of the author on the copy as far as

        practicable, and maintaining the integrity of the original work, without

                                                                                                       97
                prejudice to changes needed to make the work accessible in the alternative
                format and of the accessibility needs of the relevant disabled persons.

       As gleaned from the forgoing, clause 22 of the DCB is distinguishable from the
       already existing exception for the disabled in paragraph (s) of the Second Schedule
       to the Copyright Act. First, the proposal in clause 22 of the DCB will apply both
       offline and in the digital environment while the disability exception in the Second
       Schedule to the Copyright Act does not extend to the digital environment.
       Secondly, whereas clause 22 of the DCB is open-ended in terms of the accessible
       format copies that may be produced for the blind and VIPs, the Second Schedule
       to the Copyright Act specifically mentioned braille and sound recordings. Another
       distinction between clause 22 of the DCB and the Second Schedule to the
       Copyright Act is that while the proposal in clause 22 of the DCB will cover only
       the blind and VIPs, the exception in the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act is
       applicable to persons with other disabilities. However, the drafters of the DCB
       appear intent on making the DCB whole in terms of protection of the rights of
       disabled persons. This is gleaned from clause 20(1)(q) of the DCB, which seeks to
       permit, "without prejudice to [clause] 22 [...]", the use of a work "for the benefit of
       people with disability, which is directly related to the disability and of a non-
       commercial nature, to the extent required by the specific disability". From its
       wordings, the clause may be interpreted to extend to disabilities not covered by
       clause 22 and it will be applicable both offline and in the digital environment unlike
       the extant exception in the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act which is only
       applicable online. It will also position Nigerian copyright law as a model on how
       to go beyond the standards set out in the Marrakesh VIP treaty for the promotion
       of the interest of persons with disabilities.

2.3.3 Use by Government, Public Libraries and Archives
       The general exception in respect of national archives public records of states in
       section 15(2) of the Copyright Act is relevant here. Under that section, the
       possibility of storing copyright protected works in the national archives pursuant
       to the Public Archives Act or the public records of states pursuant to the relevant
       state's law is recognised. In this connection, copyright in such works is not
       infringed by the making or the supplying to any person of any reproduction of the

                                                                                                              98
       work pursuant to the Public Archives Act or the relevant state's law. In addition,
       paragraph (k) of the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act allows any use of a
       work by or under the direction or control of the government, or by such public
       libraries, non-commercial documentation centres and scientific or other institutions
       as may be prescribed, where the use is in the public interest, no revenue is derived
       from the use and no admission fee is charged for the communication to the public
       of the work. Also, paragraph (q) of the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act
       permits the making of not more than three copies of a book (including pamphlet,
       sheet music, map, chart or plan) by or under the direction of the person in charge
       of a public library if such a book is not available for sale in Nigeria. Finally,
       paragraph (r) of the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act allows the reproduction,
       for purposes of research or private study, of unpublished literary or musical works
       kept in libraries, museums, or other institutions open to the public.

2.3.4 Educational Use
       The Copyright Act recognises the importance of copyright protected works within
       the context of education and that certain uses in such context would need to be
       excluded from the control and power of the copyright owners. Accordingly,
       paragraph (h) of the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act allows the use of a work
       in an approved educational institution for the educational purposes of that
       institution, subject to the condition that, if a reproduction is made for any such
       purpose it shall be destroyed before the end of the prescribed period, or if there is
       no prescribed period, before the end of the 12 months after it was made. Also, the
       Copyright Act permits the production of course packs for educational purposes in
       this connection, paragraph (f) of the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act allows
       the inclusion in a collection of literary or musical works of not more than two
       excerpts from the work if the collection bears the statement that it is designed for
       educational use and includes an acknowledgement of the title and authorship of the
       work (see The Chancellor, Masters and Scholars of the University of Oxford & Ors
       v Rameshwari Photocopy Services & Ors ((2016) RFA(OS) 81/2016 where similar
       provision in 52(1)(i) of the Indian Copyright Act was interpreted). Finally,
       paragraph (g) of the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act allows the broadcasting
       of a work in the broadcast is approved by the broadcasting authority as an
       educational broadcast.

                                                                                                              99
       2.3.5 Other Exceptions
              Other copyright exceptions under the Second Schedule to the Copyright Act related
              to the use of copyright protected works by way of parody, pastiche, or caricature
              (paragraph (b)); reproduction of artistic works and their inclusion in cinematograph
              film or broadcast (paragraphs (c) and (e)); sound recording of a literary or musical
              work (paragraph (i)); and the public non-commercial reading, recitation,
              communication or broadcast of copyright protected works (paragraphs (j), (o), (n),
              (m), and (p)).

                                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8
                   1) Given the labour, skill and investment involved in the making of

                        copyright works, such as a book, do you think there should be any
                        excerptions to copyright under the Copyright Act?
                   2) What are the relevant are the possible defences to copyright infringement
                        claims under the Copyright Act?

2.4 Summary
In this Unit, we have discussed the exceptions to copyright under the Copyright Act. While
there is a movement to identify these exceptions as users' rights, the prevailing view is that the
exceptions are regarded as mere defences to copyright infringement claims under the Copyright
Act. Nonetheless, the exceptions play very important role in ensuring the requisite equitable
balance between the private interest of copyright owners in gaining economic rewards for their
investment in creativity and the public interest in promoting access to knowledge, culture,
creativity and societal welfare. The exceptions provided for under the Copyright Act includes
fair dealing, use by persons with disabilities, educational use, use by government, public
libraries, archives and museums, among others.

2.5 References/Further readings and acknowledgment
       1) LR Patterson and SW Lindberg The Nature of Copyright: A Law of Users' Rights
            (1991)
       2) LP Loren `The nature of copyright: a law of users' rights by L. Ray Patterson and
            Stanley W. Lindberg' (1992) 90(6) MLR 1624-1633

                                                                                                                     100
3) S Flynn `Copyright legal and practical reform for the South African film industry'

(2015) 16 The AJIC

4) D Vaver `Copyright defences as user rights' (2013) 60(4) JCSU 661-672

5) DJ Gervais `Making copyright whole: A principled approach to copyright exceptions

and limitations' (2008) 5(1&2) UOLTJ 1-41

6) C Craig `The Changing Face of Fair Dealing in Canadian Copyright Law: A

Proposal for Legislative Reform' in M Geist (ed) In the Public Interest: The Future

of Canadian Copyright Law (2005) 437-461

7) A Drassinower `Taking User Rights Seriously' in M Geist (ed) In the Public Interest:

The Future of Canadian Copyright Law (2005) 462-479

8) JE Cohen `The place of the user in copyright law' (2005) 74 FLR 347-374

9) MJ Tawfik `International copyright law and fair dealing as a "user right"' (2005)

UNESCO e-Copyright Bulletin 1-15

10) N Elkin-Koren `Copyright in a Digital Ecosystem: A User-Rights Approach' in RL

Okediji (ed.) Copyright Law in an Age of Limitations and Exceptions (2016) 132-

167

11) G Pessach `Reverse exclusion in copyright law ­ reconfiguring users rights' (2011)

available                                                                   at

http://www.wipo.int/edocs/mdocs/mdocs/en/wipo_ipr_ge_11/wipo_ipr_ge_11_topi

c14.pdf

12) P Samuelson `Justification for copyright limitations & exceptions' available at

https://www.law.berkeley.edu/files/Justications_for_Copyright_Limitations_and_E

xceptions_-_Pamuela_Samuelson.pdf

13) M Geist `Fairness found: How Canada quietly shifted from fair dealing to fair use'

in M Geist (ed.) The Copyright Pentalogy: How the Supreme Court of Canada Shook

the Foundations of Canadian Copyright Law (2013) 157-186,

https://ruor.uottawa.ca/bitstream/10393/24103/1/9780776620848.pdf

14) T Schonwetter `The implications of digitizing and the Internet for "fair use" in South

Africa'             LLM                    Thesis                           (2005),

https://open.uct.ac.za/bitstream/handle/11427/4548/thesis_law_schonwettert_2005.

pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y

15) A Katz `Fair use 2.0: the rebirth of fair dealing in Canada' in M Geist (ed.) The

Copyright Pentalogy: How the Supreme Court of Canada Shook the Foundations of

                                                                                            101
Canadian  Copyright                        Law           (2013)    93-156,

https://ruor.uottawa.ca/bitstream/10393/24103/1/9780776620848.pdf

16) Adejoke Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)

17) John O Asein, Nigerian Copyright Law and Practice (Books and Gavel, 2012)

18) Adebambo Adewopo, Nigerian Copyright System: Principles and Perspectives

(Odade Publishers, 2012)

19) DO Oriakhogba and FO Osadolor `Musings on the Fair use/Fair Dealing Exception

to Copyright: Nigeria and South Africa in Focus' (2017) 8(1) Ebonyi State

University Law Journal 141-153

20) DO Oriakhogba `Case Comment: Delhi University Photocopy Case from Nigerian

and South African Contexts' (2018) 3 Journal of Intellectual Property Law 21-30

(Centre for IPR, Nirma University, India)

21) DO Oriakhogba 'Bringing the WIPO Internet treaties, audiovisual performances and

Marrakesh VIP treaties in tune with the access to knowledge and development

demands in Nigeria' (2018) 5(1) ABUAD Journal of Public and International Law

44-57

22) IA Olubiyi, `The Right of Visually Impaired Persons (VIPS) to Access Knowledge:

A Consideration of Nigerian Copyright Law and its Obligation Under the Marrakesh

Treaty' Miyetti Quarterly Law Review (2017) 2 (2) 53-78

                                                                                      102
MODULE 3 ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATION OF COPYRIGHT IN NIGERIA

Unit 3: Administration to Copyright

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 The Nigerian Copyright Commission (NCC)
3.4 Copyright Inspectors
3.5 Collective Management Organisations (CMOs)

     3.5.1 Definition of CMOs
     3.5.2 History of CMOs in Nigeria
     3.5.3 Regulation of CMOs
3.6 Duty of Publishers, etc to Maintain Register
3.7 Summary/Conclusion
3.8 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

3.1 Introduction
       Aside enabling individual authors and copyright owners to enforce their copyright, the
       Copyright Act also creates institutional frameworks for the administration and
       management of copyright in Nigeria. In this regard, the Copyright Act established the
       Nigerian Copyright Commission (NCC) with the task to administer its provisions and to
       regulate the activities of other private players, such as collective management
       organizations (CMOs, also known as collecting societies) in the management of
       copyright in Nigeria. The Copyright Act also imposes duties on publishers to maintain
       register of published works and empower the NCC to appoint Copyright Inspectors who
       will also play a role in the administration and enforcement of copyright in Nigeria. In
       this unit, we discuss the role of the NCC, CMOs, Copyright Inspectors and publishers
       under the framework of the Copyright Act in Nigeria.

3.2 Learning Outcomes
       At the completion of your study in this unit, you should be able to do the following:
       1. Highlight and explain the role the NCC in the administration of copyright in Nigeria
       2. Highlight and explain the role of CMOs in the management of copyright, and their
            regulation under the Copyright Act

                                                                                                                     103
       3. Highlight and explain the role of Copyright Inspectors in the administration and
           enforcement of copyright under the Copyright Act.

       4. Highlight and explain the role of publishers under the Copyright Act.

3.3 The Nigerian Copyright Commission (NCC)
      The 1970 Copyright Decree did not create a body for the administration of copyright in
      Nigeria. Rather, it leaves the administration of certain aspects of its provisions, such as
      the appointment of the competent authority for the regulation of CMOs, to the then
      Federal Commissioner for Trade who was in charge of the then Federal Ministry of
      Trade. However, the administration of other copyright issues, such as related to the
      development of the cultural industry and the importation of printed copyright works,
      were handled by the Copyright Unit of the then Department of Culture and the Federal
      Ministry of Finance respectively.

      As a result of the incoherent structure for copyright administration under the 1970
      Copyright Decree and the increased pressure from the creative industry for a better
      copyright regime, the then Federal Military Government promulgated the Copyright
      Decree No. 47 of 1988, which created the Nigerian Copyright Council with the mandate
      to administer, promote, and enforce copyright issues in Nigeria. The Nigerian Copyright
      Council's status was changed to the Nigerian Copyright Commission (NCC) in 1996,
      and was then confirmed through the amendment of the 1988 Decree made possible by
      the Copyright (Amendment) Decree, No. 42 of 1999.

      Another innovation introduced by the 1988 Decree was the transfer of supervisory
      powers over copyright issues to the Ministry of Culture with the effect that the NCC was
      placed under its supervision. However, this was changed following an executive directive
      by the then President (Olusegun Obasanjo) that conferred supervisory powers over
      copyright issues on the Federal Ministry of Justice. This move has been declared lawful
      by the courts on the ground that section 148(1) of the Constitution of the Federal Republic
      of Nigeria 1999 (as amended) empowers the President to assign any governmental
      business to any ministry. (see COSON v MCSN & Ors [unreported Suit No.:
      FHC/L/CS/1259/2017 delivered 13 February 2018], PMRS v NCC [unreported Suit No.
      FHC/L/CS/61/2007 delivered 4 June 2009]).

                                                                                                                    104
The NCC is now firmly established under section 34 of the Copyright Act as a body
corporate, with perpetual succession and a common seal, that may sue or be sued in its
corporate name. However, section 47 of the Copyright Act placed some limitations
against suits that may be filed against the NCC and any member of its staff. Accordingly,
no suit shall be initiated against the NCC, its members of staff for an act done in
pursuance or execution of his/her lawful duties or in respect of any alleged neglect or
default in the execution of such duty unless the suit is commenced within twelve months
from the action, neglect or default complained of or where the damage or injury
continues, within twelve months from when the damage or injury ceased. Even so, a three
months pre-action notice is required to be served on the NCC by any plaintiff seeking to
commence a suit against the NCC or any member of its staff. Such pre-action notice must
state clearly the cause of action, the particulars of the claim, the name and place of abode
of the plaintiff and the relief to be sought. The requirement of pre-action notice has been
the subject of a number of cases. For instance, the Federal High Court reduced the
required three months to 7 days on the ground that waiting for the three months' notice
to lapse before initiating the suit will unreasonably prejudice the business of the plaintiff.
This was in the case of MCSN v NCC (Suit No. FHC/L/CS/678/10) wherein the plaintiff
sought to challenge the refusal of the NCC to grant it approval to operate as a CMO.
Another instance occurred in the case of MCSN v NCC (Suit No. FHC/L/CS/35/08)
where it was held that the requirement of pre-action notice does not apply to suits for the
enforcement of fundamental rights (see also, Metro-Digital Nigeria Ltd v NCC [Suit No.
FHC/PHC/CS/225/08]).

The Copyright Act confers the NCC with both general and specific tasks. The general
tasks set out in section 34 of the Copyright Act requires the NCC to (a) be responsible
for all matters affecting copyright in Nigeria under the Copyright Act; (b) monitor and
supervise Nigeria's position in relation to international conventions and advise
government on same; (c) advise and regulate conditions for the conclusion of bilateral
and multilateral agreements between Nigeria and any other country; (d) enlighten and
inform the public on matters relating to copyright; (e) maintain an effective data bank on
authors and their works; and (f) be responsible for such other matters as relate to
copyright in Nigeria as the Minister may direct from time to time.

                                                                                                              105
The NCC's specific tasks are gleaned from sections 5, 10, 13, 17, 21, 31, 37, 38, 39, 40,
and 50 the Copyright Act. In this regard, the NCC is required to issue certification of
countries that are parties to treaty obligations for the purpose of determining whether an
eligible work may be enjoy copyright by virtue of such international obligation. The
certificate will be conclusive proof of the fact. Also, the NCC has the duty to regulate the
conditions for the exercise of authors' resale rights in respect of graphic works, three-
dimensional works and manuscripts; issue exemption certificates to enable an
unapproved CMO to commence action for the infringement of copyright or any right
under the Copyright Act; and regulate, including granting approvals for, the operation pf
CMOs under the Copyright Act. Further, the NCC has the task to prescribe anti-piracy
devices for use on, or in connection with an work in which copyright subsists; administer
the use of expression of folklore by third parties outside their traditional or customary
contexts; grant compulsory licences pursuant to the Fourth Schedule of the Copyright
Act and establish and regulate the Copyright Licensing Panel for this purpose; receive
and disburse funds arising from the imposition of compulsory levy on copyright
materials; to appoint copyright inspectors (discussed below); and to regulate the
conditions necessary for the operation of a business involving the production, public
exhibition, hiring or rental of any copyright protected work. In this connection, the NCC
has made a number of regulations including the Copyright (Levy on Materials) Order
2012, Copyright (Collective Management Organization) Regulations 2007, Copyright
(Optical Disc Plants) Regulations 2006, Copyright (Video Rental) Regulations 1999,
Copyright (Security Devices) Regulations 1999, and the Copyright (Dispute Resolution
Panel) Rules, 2007.

Furthermore, the NCC is charged under section 50 of the Copyright Act to execute
directives of a general or special nature issued to it by the Minister in respect of the its
functions under the Copyright Act. Such directive was issued by the Minister to the NCC
for the immediate approval of the Musical Copyright Society Nigeria (MCSN) as a CMO
in 2017. The directive and consequential approval of the MCSN was challenged by the
Copyright Society of Nigeria (COSON) on the ground that the Minister of Justice who
issued the directive was not the designated Minister under the Copyright Act. The court
rejected COSON's contention. It held that the Minister of Justice validly issued the
directive having been designated by the President to oversee copyright regulation in
Nigeria pursuant to section 148(1) of the Constitution. The court also held that

                                                                                                              106
      compliance by the NCC with the directive under section 50 of the Copyright Act is
      mandatory (see COSON v MCSN & Ors, supra).

      To carry out its general and specific functions effectively, a governing board is created
      for the NCC under section 36 of the Copyright Act and the board is to consist of (a) the
      chairman who must be a person knowledgeable in copyright matters to be recommended
      by the Minister for appointment by the president; (b) the Director General (DG); (c) one
      representative each of the Federal Ministry of Justice and Ministry of Education who
      must not be below the rank of director, the Nigeria Police Force not below the rank of a
      Commissioner of Police, and the Nigeria Customs Services not below the rank of
      Comptroller of Customs; and (d) six other persons to be appointed by the Minister who
      shall represent as far as possible the authors in literary, artistic, musical, and
      cinematograph works, sound recordings and broadcasts. The governing board is
      empowered to adopt rules to govern its procedures and methods of operation. It is
      important to stress that the role of the Chairman (and other board members, except the
      DG) is merely ceremonial and he/she serves not as a full-time staff of the NCC.

      In terms of section 37 of the Copyright Act, the day-to-day administration of the NCC is
      the responsibility of the DG who is appointed by the President on recommendation of the
      Minister. To assist the DG in this regard, the NCC is empowered to appoint other staff
      and to determine their remuneration and allowances from time to time. The NCC is also
      empowered to pay its staff such pension and gratuity payable to persons of equivalent
      rank in the public service of the Federation. To this end, service under NCC is declared
      pensionable for purposes of the Pensions Act. However, the NCC may appoint any
      person to any office subject to terms which precludes such person from the grant of
      pension, gratuity or any other retirement benefit in respect of the office.

3.4 Copyright Inspectors
      Under section 38 of the Copyright Act, the NCC is empowered to appoint copyright
      inspectors as it deems fit. When appointed, a copyright inspector is vested with all the
      powers, rights and privileges of a police officer as defined under the Police Act and under
      any other relevant enactment pertaining to the investigation, prosecution or defence of a
      civil or criminal matter under the Copyright Act. Accordingly, the copyright inspector is
      vested with the following specific powers:

                                                                                                                    107
  1) to enter, inspect and examine any building or premises upon reasonable suspicion
       that such building/premises is being used for copyright infringement-related
       activities;

  2) to arrest upon reasonable belief that an offence has been committed under the
       Copyright Act;

  3) to examine or inquire for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the
       Copyright Act;

  4) to require production of, inspect, examine or copy the register referred to under
       section 14 of the Copyright Act;

  5) to enquire for necessary information from persons find in building/premises
       suspected as being used for infringement of copyright;

  6) to examine, test or analyse the premises suspected of being used for infringement
       of copyright including the power to take photographs of necessary evidence. The
       outcome of such examination, test or analysis is however required to be endorsed
       by the occupier of the premises or his agent. Where the occupier or his agent
       however refuses to endorse, this will not affect the validity of the documents so
       removed from the premises;

  7) to prosecute, conduct or defend before a court any charge, information, complaint
       or other proceedings arising under the Copyright Act

  8) to exercise such other powers as the Commission may delegate to it to give effect
       to the provisions of the Act.

The powers of copyright inspectors under the Copyright Act was tested in the case of
NCC & Ors v MCSN & Ors (Suit No. CA/L/350/13 delivered 19 October 2016), wherein
the respondent challenged the search and seizure exercise and arrest carried out by
copyright inspectors in its premises and against its officers. In that case, the Court of
Appeal determined the specific issue of whether copyright inspectors can arrest without
a warrant for alleged offences committed under the Copyright Act. This question was
resolved in the negative by the trial court, hence the appeal. In allowing the appeal, the
Court of Appeal did not only confirm the arresting powers of copyright inspectors, it also
upheld their powers to arrest without warrant in deserving cases. The Court of Appeal
spoke through Nimpar JCA as follows:

   "I do not think that the question is really as to the power of arrest by inspectors; it
   is whether they can arrest without warrant. [...] I [...] do not agree that the [NCC's]

                                                                                                              108
         inspectors cannot arrest without a warrant. Section 38 of the Copyright Act does
         not also infringe on the Constitution. [...] The clear provisions of the Copyright
         Act give the Inspectors power similar to that of Police Officers and I therefore fail
         to see how the trial court arrived at the conclusion that the Inspectors required a
         warrant before they can arrest the respondents."

      Further, the powers of copyright inspectors to institute criminal proceedings as provided
      under section 38(3) was confirmed in the case of NCC v MCSN ([Suit No.
      FHC/L/43C/99]). However, it must be noted that the powers of the copyright inspectors
      to arrest and prosecute does not extend to offences outside the purview of the Copyright
      Act. The powers are strictly limited to offences prescribed under the Copyright Act (see
      Ayika v NCC [Suit No. FCT/HC/M/5222/2011]). Also, only copyright inspectors who
      have a right of audience in superior courts, such as the Federal High Court, in the sense
      of being called to the Nigerian Bar, can prosecute any crime under the Copyright Act
      before that court (see FRN v Osahon [2006] 5 NWLR (Pt. 973) 261. Contrast with NCC
      v Nigerian American Merchant Bank [Suit No. FHC/L/118C/2003]). Finally, it should
      be noted that obstruction of the copyright inspectors in the performance of their lawful
      duty is an offence punishable by a fine of N500 or to 3 months imprisonment or both
      (section 38(4) of the Copyright Act.

3.5 Collective Management Organizations (CMOs)
      Piracy of copyrighted works has put on the toga of ubiquity making it possible for
      copyright owners to suffer loss in terms of material wellbeing even though they enjoy
      fame from the popularity of their works through acts of piracy. Put differently, the rise
      in the mass media, communication systems and entertainment centres, airlines, etc., and
      the internet has made it possible for copyrighted works to be exploited without due
      authorisation from copyright owners. Individual owners cannot possibly enforce their
      rights in respect of such widespread infringement because they cannot be everywhere at
      the same time and in most cases, are not equipped with the resources to go after infringers
      or grant licenses to user wishing to exploit their works. This state of affairs, which did
      not start today, gave birth to CMOs with established merits and demerits as far as
      copyright management and enforcement are concerned.

                                                                                                                    109
3.5.1 Definition of CMOs
       The Copyright Act recognises the right of copyright owners to initiate civil
       proceedings for infringement of their copyright. It further recognises, under section
       39, the existence of CMOs and empowers them to manage the copyright on behalf
       of copyright owners. It also enables CMOs to enforce the copyright in their
       repertoire on behalf of individual owners (their members) through, inter alia, the
       initiation of civil proceedings. CMOs are referred to under section 39(8) of the
       Copyright Act as collecting societies, which mean associations of copyright owners
       having as their principal objectives the negotiating and granting of licenses,
       collecting and distributing of royalties in respect of copyright works. While this
       definition seems to capture the basic functions of CMOs, it is too restrictive in
       defining its scope thus limiting it to association of copyright owners. This is so
       because CMOs may function as agents of right holders who voluntarily entrusted the
       licensing of one or more uses of their works to a collective. They may also function
       as assignees of copyright same way as they may function as an association of right
       holders. Thus, for a proper definition, it will be better to emphasise the role CMOs
       play instead of defining it in terms of its make-up. These roles include the monitoring
       of the use of copyright works on behalf of the owners; negotiating terms of license
       with prospective users of copyright works; granting licenses against appropriate
       remunerations on the basis of a tariff system and under appropriate conditions;
       collecting such remunerations and distributing same among the copyright owners on
       whose behalf they were collected; and other socio-cultural functions through which
       they take care of members' welfare, promote creativity and fight piracy, among
       others.

3.5.2 History of CMOs in Nigeria
       Generally, the origin of CMOs can be traced to 3 July 1777 when Pierre Augustin
       Caron de Beaumarchais (Beaumarchais) gathered twenty-two authors, some of the
       most creative writers at that time arising from a complaint lodged by him of his
       dissatisfaction regarding the remuneration from Comedie Francaise in respect of
       performances of his "Barbier de Seville". Prior to the said complaint, other writers
       whose works had been performed and who were displeased by their remuneration
       had made similar complaints that were not attended to by the authorities, but
       Beaumarchais' influence with the French leadership, at the time, induced the

                                                                                                                110
performers (comedians) to heed his complaint and negotiated with him resulting in
a review of the Royal Theatre Regulations. The gathering of authors assembled by
Beaumarchais led to the birth of the first CMO, Societe des Auteurs et Compositeurs
Dramatiques (SACD), a professional association for creative writers based in
France, which was followed by Societe des gens de letters (SGDL) in the field of
literary works constituted by notable French authors. However, it was about 1847
that the concept of modern CMO evolved through the suit initiated by Ernest Bourget
(a writer), Paul Henrion and Victor Parizot (composers) supported by their publisher
Jules Colmbier against a Paris "Café Ambassadeurs" (a restaurant) for claims of
royalties for the public performance of their works, which ended in their favour. This
development goaded the establishment of Societe des Auteurs, Compositeurs et
Editeurs de Musique (SACEM) in 1851 and similar CMOs across Europe,
particularly in United Kingdom where the Performing Right Society (PRS) was
founded in 1914 at which time Nigeria was under British colonial rule and at which
time the Copyright Act of 1911 was already in force in UK and by extension,
Nigeria.

The effect of the foregoing is that PRS's activities as a CMO extended to Nigeria
until about 1970 when the first indigenous Copyright law was promulgated in
Nigeria. Flowing from this, PRS appointed a law firm, Giwa & Atilade and Co. as
their Nigerian Agent with a mandate to get Nigerian composers to join them and to
commence licensing and collection of royalties from Nigerian users on their behalf.
Although the law firm succeeded in getting some prominent Nigerian Composers at
that time to join PRS, it found it difficult to license and collect royalties from
Nigerian users who were not comfortable with the foreign status of PRS. This led
Alhaji Giwa, a partner in the firm, to set up Musical Copyright Society of Nigeria
(MSCN) registered on 20 July 1984 as a company limited by guarantee, as the first
CMO to administer rights in music and sound recordings in Nigeria. Other CMOs
operating in Nigeria currently are Copyright Society of Nigeria (COSON) also in
respect of music and sound recordings, and Reproduction Right Society of Nigeria
(REPRONIG) approved in 2001 by the NCC to represent right holders in literary
works, and the Audio Visual Rights Society of Nigeria (AVRS) established and
approved in 2014 to cater for copyright management in the audio-visual industry.

                                                                                                         111
3.5.3 Regulation of CMOs
       Section 39 of the Copyright Act forms the foundation for the regulation of CMOs in
       Nigeria. Historically, however, it has not always been the case that our copyright
       law made such provisions. Under the 1970 Decree, there was no direct provision for
       CMO other than, inter alia, the provision for the Federal Commissioner of Trade to
       appoint a competent authority comprising three persons to review the grant of
       licenses by a licensing body. Unfortunately, there was total absence of a regulatory
       framework under the 1988 Decree, which repealed the 1970 Decree. This situation
       continued until the promulgation of Copyright (Amendment) Decree, No. 98 of
       1992, which ushered in a new set of comprehensive rules for the regulation of CMOs
       in Nigeria.

       Under the Copyright Act, a CMO may be formed in respect of any one or more rights
       of copyright owners for the benefit of such owners, and the CMO may apply to the
       NCC for approval to operate as such for the purpose of the Act (section 39(1)). It
       constitutes a crime for any group of persons to purport to perform the duties of a
       CMO without approval of the NCC and such a crime is punishable with a fine of N1,
       000 on first commission and N2, 000 and six months jail in case of individuals; and
       N10, 000 and N2, 000 for each day in case of continuous offence in case of
       commission by a body corporate (section 39(4), (5) and (6)). The NCC may approve
       a CMO if it is satisfied that it is incorporated as a company limited by guarantee; its
       objects are to carry out the general duty of negotiating and granting copyright
       licenses and collecting royalties on behalf of copyright owners and distributing same
       to them; it represents a substantial number of owners of copyright in any category of
       copyright protected works; and it complies with the terms and conditions prescribed
       by the regulations made by the NCC (section 39(2)). In this connection, the NCC
       shall not approve another CMO in respect of any class of copyright owners if it is
       satisfied that an existing approved CMO adequately protects the interests of that
       class of copyright owners (section 39(3)). The Copyright Act further empowers the
       NCC to make regulations specifying conditions necessary for the supervision of
       CMOs (section 39(7)).

       Pursuant to the foregoing, the NCC made the Copyright (Collective Management
       Organisations) Regulations, 2007 (the CMO Regulation) and the Copyright (Dispute

                                                                                                                112
Resolution Panel) Rules, 2007 (DPR Rules). The Regulation, which contains 23
paragraphs, makes provisions for application, revocation and renewal of licenses of
CMOs; membership and management of CMOs; licensing and distribution of
royalties by CMOs and other miscellaneous issues, such as ethical practices, among
other. On its part, the DPR Rules comprise 17 paragraphs, which prescribes issues
relating to general procedures and constitution of the DPR. Generally, the DPR is
meant to afford an alternative dispute resolution mechanism for parties to dispute
relating to collective management in Nigeria. In this regard, the DPR is required to
apply relevant provisions of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, Cap A18, Laws of
the Federation of Nigeria, 2004. Finally, the NCC is empowered, where it finds it
expedient, to assist in establishing a CMO for any class of copyright owners Section
39(9).

The requirement for approval to operate as a CMO under section 39 of the Copyright
Act have been challenged on the grounds that it would take away CMOs' right to
freedom of association and right to own property; that it runs against the no formality
rules under the Berne Convention; and that it will take away CMOs' existing rights
protected under section 52(3) of the Copyright Act. However, it has been judicially
settled that the requirement for approval does not violate human rights to freedom
of association and own property; neither does it infringe the no formality rule under
the Berne Convention; and that it also does not jettison existing rights acquired
before commencement of section 39 (MCSN v CBS, Appeal No CA/L/576/2014,
Court of Appeal, 29 December 2015).

The effect of section 17 of the Copyright Act has been a recurring issue relating to
the regulation of CMOs in Nigeria. Section 17 seeks to prevent a CMOs unapproved
by the NCC under section 39 from instituting any action for the enforcement of any
rights under the Copyright Act. The section raises the issue of locus standi of an
unapproved CMO to sue for the enforcement of a right under the section 16 of the
Copyright Act. This issue has reoccurred in a plethora of cases, and was recently
resolved by the Supreme Court (Generally, see MCSN v Compact Disc Technology
Ltd & Ors., SC. 425/2010 (14 December 2018); Adeokin Records v MCSN, SC.
336/2008, Supreme Court, 13 July 2018; MCSN v CBS, Appeal No CA/L/576/2014,
Court of Appeal, 29 December 2015; PMRS v Skye Bank (2017) LPELR-43198;

                                                                                                         113
Multichoice v MCSN Suit No FHC/L/CS/1091/11, Federal High Court, 19 January
2018; MCSN v Details, Appeal No.: CA/L/506/1999, Court of Appeal, 28 May 2015;
Compact Disc Tech. Ltd v MCSN 53 NIPJD [CA. 2010] 787/2008; MCSN v Adeokin
Records (2007) 13 NWLR (Pt 1052) 616).

In terms of the Supreme Court's judgement on the locus standi question in the case
of MCSN v Compact Disc Technology Ltd (supra), CMOs may initiate copyright
infringement claims as (a)owner, (b) assignee and (c) exclusive licensee of
copyright. This is so because, under sections 10 and 11 of the Copyright Act,
copyright ownership may vest in natural persons (humans) and juristic persons
(corporate entities, for instance). As earlier discussed, copyright ownership is
acquired through authorship, assignments, or exclusive licenses. Also, as a condition
to obtaining the NCC's approval, CMOs are required to be incorporated as
companies limited by guarantee in Nigeria. The incorporation makes them juristic
persons such that they can and usually do obtain copyright ownership via
assignments and/or exclusive licenses. Thus, CMOs may initiate copyright
infringement actions in their personal capacity as owners, assignees and exclusive
licensees of copyright in terms of section 16 of the Copyright Act without the need
for approval by the NCC. Furthermore, based on the aforesaid Supreme Court's
judgment, CMOs may initiate copyright infringement actions as (d) persons
involved in the business of negotiating, granting of licences, collection and
distribution of royalties for not more than fifty owners of copyright in any class of
works. They may also initiate actions as (e) associations of copyright owners
established in terms of section 39 of the Copyright Act. CMOs falling under both
categories (d) and (e) can only commence copyright claims in representative
capacities. Aside suing in representative capacities, CMOs coming under category
(d) will not require approval of the NCC to enjoy the right of action in terms of the
Copyright Act. However, CMOs acting for more than fifty copyright owners will
fall under category (e) and will most likely face the locus standi challenge under
section 17 of the Copyright Act, especially if the copyright they seek to enforce was
assigned or exclusively licensed to them after the commencement date of section 17
(i.e. 10 May 1999).

                                                                                                         114
3.6 Duty of Publishers, etc., to Maintain Register
      In terms of section 14 of the Copyright Act, publishers, printers, producers and
      manufacturers of copyright protected works are enjoined to keep a register of all works
      produced by them. The register must show the name of the authors, the title of the works,
      the year of production and the quantity of the works produced. Failure to keep such
      register, or, where the register is kept, the inclusion of false entry in the register, is a
      crime under section 23 of the Copyright Act. Also, the section criminalises the
      production, tendering, or causing the production or tendering, as evidence any entering
      in the register knowing such entry to be false. Punishment for the crime is a maximum
      of ten thousand naira (N10,000). Where such offence is committed, both the company
      and its responsible official will be liable for prosecution under the Copyright Act, except
      the officer is able to show that the offence was committed without his/her knowledge or
      that he/she exercised all due diligence to prevent the offence from being committed (see
      section 22 of the Copyright Act).

3.7 Summary
      In this unit, we have discussed the role of the NCC, CMOs, Copyright Inspectors, and
      publishers, etc., in the administration, regulation and enforcement of copyright under the
      Copyright Act. The Copyright Act did not leave the development and promotion of the
      copyright in Nigeria to private individuals only. It also created public institutional
      framework for this purpose.

3.8 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
       1) Adejoke Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)
       2) John O Asein, Nigerian Copyright Law and Practice (Books and Gavel, 2012)
       3) Adebambo Adewopo, Nigerian Copyright System: Principles and Perspectives
           (Odade Publishers, 2012)
       4) JO Odion and DO Oriakhogba, `Copyright collective management organizations in
           Nigeria: resolving the locus standi conundrum' (2015) 10(7) Journal of Intellectual
           Property Law and Practice 518-525
       5) IA Olubiyi and KI Adams, `An examination of the adequacy of the regulation of
           collecting societies in Nigeria' (2017) 5 South African Intellectual Property Law
           Journal 89-114

                                                                                                                    115
       6) CI Okorie, `Corporate governance of collecting societies in Nigeria: powers of the
            copyright sector regulator' (2018) 6 South African Intellectual Property Law
            Journal 24-46

       7) DO Oriakhogba,6 `Strengthening the regulation regimes for collecting societies in
            South Africa and Nigeria: Any room for competition law? (PhD Thesis, University
            of Cape Town, July 2018),
            https://open.uct.ac.za/bitstream/handle/11427/29998/thesis_law_2018_oriakhogba
            _desmond_osaretin.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y

       8) A Adewopo `Developments in Collective Administration of Copyright, Licensing
            and Tariff Setting under Nigerian Copyright Law and Regulation' in DCJ Dakas et
            al (eds.) Beyond Shenanigans: Jos Book of Readings on Critical Legal Issues
            (2016) 677-700

       9) A Adewopo `Analysis of copyright in digital music: implications for new media
            licensing for ringtones under the Nigerian Copyright Act' (2017) 8(1) GRBPL 1-
            23.

      10) M Ficsor Collective Management of Copyright and Related Rights (WIPO, 2002),
            https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/copyright/855/wipo_pub_855.pdf

      11) U Uchtenhagen Copyright Collective Management in Music (WIPO, 2011),
            https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/copyright/789/wipo_pub_789.pdf

      12) DJ Gervais `The landscape of collective management schemes' (2011) 34(4) CJLA
            423-449;

      13) DJ Gervais `Collective management of copyright and neighbouring rights in
            Canada: An international perspective' (2002) 1(2) CJLT 21-50

      14) A Adewopo `Proposals for Liberalisation of Collecting Societies in Nigeria' in J
            Asein and E Nwauche eds. A Decade of Copyright Law in Nigeria (2002) 143-151

      15) DO Oriakhogba7 `Copyright collective management organization in Nigeria: the
            locus standi conundrum resolved?' (2019) Journal of Intellectual Property Law
            and Practice 127-135

      16) DO Oriakhogba and EO Erhagbe,8 `How the Nigerian Supreme Court finally
            resolved the copyright collective management organizations' locus standi

6Parts of this unit are excerpts from the paper.

7 Parts of this unit are excerpts from the paper.
8 Parts of this unit are excerpts from the paper.

                                                                                                                     116
      conundrum' (2019) 14(6) Journal of Intellectual Property Law and Practice 472-
      476
17) Ola Copyright Collective Administration in Nigeria: Lessons for Africa (Springer,
      2013)
18) DO Oriakhogba, `Legal Mechanisms for the Enforcement and Regulation of
      Copyright in Nigeria: A Comparative Analysis' (LLM Thesis, University of Benin,
      June 2014)

                                                                                                               117
MODULE 4 EMERGING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES

Unit 1: Traditional Knowledge, Traditional Cultural Expression and Genetic Resources

 1.1 Introduction
 1.2 Learning Outcomes
 1.3 Definition of TK, TCEs and GRs

       1.3.1 TKs and TCEs
       1.3.2 Genetic Resources
 1.4 The work of the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and GRs, TK
       and Folklore (the IGC)
       1.4.1 Challenges of Facing the IGC
       1.4.2 Successes of the IGC
 1.5 Protection of TK, TCEs and GRs at national level
 1.6 Summary
 1.7 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

1.1 Introduction
      In this module, we focus on key cross-cutting emerging intellectual property issues, such
      as the protection of traditional knowledge, traditional cultural expressions and genetic
      resources, and digitisation and intellectual property. These issues are important because of
      their global and national perspectives and the fact that they are at the core of current
      discourse around the global and national intellectual property systems.

      Particularly, in this unit, we discuss the meaning traditional knowledge, traditional cultural
      expressions and genetic resources (TK, TCEs and GRs), attempts at the global and regional
      level within the framework of WIPO to formulate international normative framework(s)
      for the protection of TK, TCEs and GRs, and the approaches to the protection of TK, TCEs,
      and GRs at the national level, especially in Nigeria.

1.2 Learning outcomes
      At the completion of your study in this unit, you should be able to do the following:
        1) Define TK, TCEs and GRs.

                                                                                                                      118
        2) Discuss the history, development, initiatives and approaches around the protection
             of TK, TCEs and GRs at the global and regional levels.

        3) Explain the approaches to the protection of TK, TCEs and GRs at the national levels.
        4) Discuss the protection of TK, TCEs and GRs in Nigeria

1.3 Definition of TK, TCEs and GRs
      1.3.1 TK and TCEs
             According to WIPO, TK can be viewed from a narrow sense which refers to
             knowledge, know-how, skills, innovation and practices that are developed, sustained
             and passed on from generation to generation within a community, often forming part
             of its cultural or spiritual identity. It can be found in a wide variety of contexts
             including agricultural, scientific, technical, ecological and medicinal knowledge as
             well as biodiversity-related knowledge. In a general sense, however, TK
             encompasses TCEs, which WIPO defines as the forms that traditional culture
             forming part of the identity and heritage of a traditional or indigenous community
             passed down from generation to generation, are expressed. Also known as
             expressions of folklore, TCEs include music, dance, art, designs, names, signs and
             symbols, performances, ceremonies, architectural forms, handicrafts and narratives,
             or many other artistic or cultural expressions.

             Gleaned from the above, TK and TCEs bear their origin to particular indigenous
             community to which they are linked; are communally owned by that community; are
             perpetual in the sense that they are not limited by time; and are passed down from
             one generation to the next via oral tradition and as such, are often times not fixed in
             any particular medium. Given their nature, therefore, it is difficult to find protection
             for TK and TCEs under conventional intellectual property systems. Thus, WIPO has
             been involved in a decade-long negotiation aimed at formulating normative
             standards for TK, TCEs and GRs (discussed below). The negotiation is taking place
             at the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and GRs, TK and
             Folklore (the IGC). We will discuss the journey so far briefly below.

             For now, it should be noted that scholars have argued that innovations derivable from
             TK can find protection through the instrumentality of patent, trademark,
             geographical indication or as trade secret or confidential information; whereas, TCEs

                                                                                                                      119
       may be protected through the copyright and related rights, geographical indication,
       and trademark (collective and communal marks) systems. In this connection, two
       strategies can be adopted: the defensive and positive protection. Defensive
       protection refers to a set of strategies to ensure that third parties do not gain
       illegitimate or unfounded intellectual property rights over the TK and TCEs. For
       instance, countries, such as India, are developing TK databases which may be used
       as evidence of prior art to defeat a claim to a patent on such TK. Positive protection
       involves strategies aimed at ensuring active exploitation of TK and TCEs by the
       originating community and preventing unauthorised uses of by third parties.

1.3.2 Genetic Resources
       GRs refer to genetic materials of plants, animals, microbial or of other origin
       containing functional units of heredity with actual or potential value, such as
       medicinal plants, agricultural crops and animal breeds. According to WIPO, GRs are
       encountered in nature and are not creations of the human mind and thus they cannot
       be directly protected as intellectual property. However, there are still associated
       intellectual property issues within the context of GRs. For instance, inventions or
       plant varieties based on or developed from genetic resources linked with TK (or not)
       may find protection under laws relating to plant breeders' rights or may be
       patentable. But questions continue to arise as to how to protect the rights or interests
       of the communities from which the GRs are found. In other words, how do we ensure
       that the communities share in the benefit arising from commercial exploitation of
       invention or the plant variety by the inventors or developers of the plant variety as
       the case may be?

       The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity 1992 and its Nagoya
       Protocol 2010, and the International Treaty on Plant Genetic Resources for Food and
       Agriculture 2001 adopted under the auspice of the Food and Agricultural
       Organization have provided frameworks for access and benefit-sharing to take care
       of the interest of the communities vis-à-vis the inventors or developers of plant
       varieties. These treaties do not, however, fall within the global intellectual property
       system which the WIPO overseas. Thus, like TK and TCEs, the member states of
       WIPO are still negotiating an appropriate normative treaty that will best cater for the
       interest of the communities from which the genetic resources originate and those of

                                                                                                                120
             intellectual property rights owners. WIPO's work in this regard is aimed at
             complementing the treaties identified above.

1.4 The work of the Intergovernmental Committee on Intellectual Property and GRs,
      TK and Folklore (the IGC)
      The IGC was established in the year 2000 by WIPO General Assembly with the task to
      develop international legal instruments on intellectual property and GRs, TK and TCEs.
      The mandate of the IGC is determined by the General Assembly every two years. The
      latest mandate is to run from 2020-2021 with the objective of "finalizing an agreement on
      an international legal instrument(s), without prejudging the nature of outcome(s), relating
      to intellectual property (IP) which will ensure the balanced and effective protection of
      genetic resources, traditional knowledge and traditional cultural expressions". The IGC's
      work is coordinated through the WIPO Traditional Knowledge Division. The Director of
      the Division acts as the secretary to the IGC. Although the legal instrument(s) has(ve) not
      been finalised, the IGC has made remarkable progress despite facing tough challenges.

     1.4.1 Challenges Facing the IGC
             The challenges faced by the IGC centres around the nature of TK, TCEs and GR
             which the IGC has to address, the modus operandi of the IGC, and the broader
             multilateral framework (WIPO) within which the IGC is carrying out its mandate.
             We have seen from the discussions in (3.1.1) above that by their nature of TK, TCEs
             and GRs do not fit properly within the framework of conventional intellectual
             property systems. Thus, according to Wendland, developing an international
             instrument for their protection would require an "unusually high degree of
             substantive competence as well as domestic coordination and policy coherence
             within participating countries". Unfortunately, there is not enough regional and
             national models for negotiators at the IGC to draw from in achieving their mandate.

             Also, there is little interdependence between the issues being addressed by the IGC
             and other matters on the global intellectual property itinerary. This is further
             complicated by the disintegrated nature of the treatment of the issues at different
             international settings, such as the UNESCO and the FAO. In effect, WIPO member
             states pushing for a normative framework for TK, TCEs and GRs (usually countries
             from the global south) are left with slim chances of obtaining concessions from

                                                                                                                      121
       member states that are against such frameworks (usually countries from the global
       north). This is made worse by the persisting divergent views and political willingness
       on the part of member states and the fact that the broader WIPO system requires
       consensus among member states for the finalisation and adoption of international
       instruments. Moreover, there is not enough pressure from members of the public and
       civil society for quick completion of the IGC's work.

1.4.2 Successes of the IGC
       Despite the foregoing challenges, the IGC has recorded commendable positive
       outcomes. In the early days, the IGC's work combined technical analyses, exchanges
       of practical experiences, policy debates and fact-gathering, which led to practical
       outcomes such as the enhanced recognition of TK as prior art that forms the basis
       for the defensive protection of TK. The IGC also commenced work on technical
       standards for TK documentation and IP clauses for use in access and benefit-sharing
       agreements.

       However, there was some sought of interregnum on the normative work of the IGC
       between 2003 and 2009, arising from disagreement among member states on
       whether or not there is need for an international instrument/what form or shape such
       instrument will take if at all. However, things changed in late 2009 when the WIPO
       General Assembly determined the IGC's mandate for 2010 to 2011 with the
       objective to of embarking on a text-based negotiation on all three aspects (TK, TCEs
       and GRs) and for the possible convening of a Diplomatic conference. This led to the
       development of new methodologies by the IGC, such as the convening of
       intersessional working groups, ad hoc expert groups, friends of the Chair, expert
       drafting groups, informal meeting formats, seminars, etc., which draws upon the
       technical and practical competences of experts and representatives of indigenous
       communities, with the aim, according to Wendland, of balancing "inclusiveness and
       transparency, on the one hand, and efficiency and effectiveness, on the other" hand.

       Further, some clarity emerged in the negotiations on GRs. A single consolidated text
       emerged with options around a new patent disclosure requirement relating to GR. In
       fact, the first WIPO publication on "Key Questions on Patent Disclosure
       Requirements for Genetic Resources and Traditional Knowledge" was published in

                                                                                                                 122
2017 based on this development. Another milestone was recorded in 2019 with the
preparation of a draft international instrument on GR and associated TK by the IGC
Chair, Ian Goss, which is now known as the Chair's draft. This draft now forms part
of the documents to be considered by member states in their negotiation towards
achieving the IGC's mandate.

The global debates also led to the development, in 2014, of the still evolving concept
of the tiered or differentiated approach to the protection of TK and TCE within an
international legal regime. The main rationale for developing this approach includes
the advancement of legal certainty and clarity of TK and TCEs. According to
Professor Okediji, the "approach sought to provide a structure for distinguishing
categories of traditional knowledge and corresponding rights", and the tiers
proposed are distinguished "along various degrees of publicness". The "degrees of
publicness" of each tier are important in determining the strength and exclusivity of
the legal rights attached to each tier. The proposed tiers are "secret traditional
knowledge," "sacred traditional knowledge," "closely held traditional knowledge"
and "widely diffused traditional knowledge."

The "secret and sacred traditional knowledge" would be those that are closely held
by a given community as knowledge forming the essence of, and integral to, the
existence of that community to which access should be strictly restricted. As such,
they may be regarded as rights protectable under the principles of trade secret, patent
and unfair competition law. The "closely held traditional knowledge" may be seen
as the knowledge maintained by subgroups (such as tribal elders) within an
indigenous community, but which is "still highly integrated into the cultural
heritage" of the community. According to Okediji, such class of TK may be afforded
same protection as the "sacred or secret traditional knowledge", even though access
to it may not be strictly limited. The "widely diffused traditional knowledge"
represents those traditional or cultural practices that have become so widely
disseminated that their origin or roots are highly contestable. To illustrate, Okediji
gave the example of Yoga, which is widely known to be associated with India.
However, the dissemination of Yoga and its "gradual, albeit incomplete, disconnect
from Indian cultural identity make the full panacea of IP rights both impracticable
and unjustifiable". According to the expert, such traditional or cultural expressions

                                                                                                         123
             may be protected by mere attribution rights under international intellectual property
             legal frameworks with the allowance for more protection under national intellectual
             property regimes.

             With its achievements so far, scholars, such as Oguamanam, believe that in the event
             the IGC does not reach a consensus on appropriate international instrument(s) for
             GR, TK and TCEs, it cannot really be regarded as a failure because its work in the
             last decade has produced enough motivation, model and technical knowledge,
             including proper conceptualisation of the issues, required for national and regional
             legal instruments for the protection of GR, TK and TCE at those levels.

1.5 Protection of TK, TCEs and GRs at National Level
      Ncube and du Plessis identified four schools of thoughts that have developed in relation to
      the quest for developing legal regimes for TK, TCEs and GR. According to the authors,
      there is
             "a group that believes that indigenous knowledge can be protected in existing
             legislation; secondly, a group that believes that indigenous knowledge can be
             protected differently but in existing legislation; thirdly, a group that believes that
             what is required is sui generis legislation, but still in the framework of ownership
             and private property; and lastly a group that advocates for sui generis legislation
             not necessarily based on private ownership".

      Existing regional and national regimes adopts one of two broad approaches. First, the
      direct protection of TK, TCEs and GRs through existing intellectual property law.
      Examples for this approach can be found in Nigeria (discussed below) and South Africa
      in terms of the Intellectual Property Laws Amendment Act, No. 28 of 2013. There is also
      the enactment of new laws that adopt the tools of intellectual property law. The Protection
      of Traditional Knowledge and Cultural Expressions Act, N0. 33 2016 of Kenya provides
      an example of this. The problem with this approach is that the concepts of exclusivity,
      fixation, ownership, individualism and time limitation that underpin conventional
      intellectual property law do not accommodate the nature of TK, TCEs and GRs already
      highlighted above. The second approach is the protection of TK, TCEs and GRs through
      sui generis legal frameworks which take cognizance, and are tailor-made to align with the
      peculiarities, of the nature of TK, TCEs and GRs, but may or may not borrow from existing
      intellectual property regimes. This form of protection is found in regional mechanisms

                                                                                                                      124
such as the African Union's Model Law for the Protection of the Rights of Local
Communities, Farmers and Breeders, and for the Regulation of Access to Biological
Resources 2001, and ARIPO's Swakopmund Protocol on the Protection of Traditional
Knowledge and Expression of Folklore 2010. The Protection, Promotion, Development
and Management of Indigenous Knowledge Systems Act 6 of 2019 of South Africa is an
example of a national sui generis legislation for the protection of TK, TCEs and GRs.

As stated above, Nigeria adopted the approach of direct protection under an existing
intellectual property statute. Even so, the protection does not extend to TK and GR. It is
limited to TCEs, which fall under neighbouring rights in part II of the Copyright Act.
Specifically, section 31 of the Copyright Act regards TCEs as expressions of folklore,
which is defined as

     "group oriented and tradition-based creation of groups or individuals reflecting
     the expectation of the community as an adequate expression of its cultural and
     social identity, its standards and values as transmitted orally, by imitation or by
     other means, including ­ (a) folklore, folk poetry, and folk riddles; (b) folk songs
     and instrumental folk music; (c) folk dances and folk plays; (d) productions of
     folk art in particular, drawings, paintings, carvings, sculptures, pottery, terracotta,
     mosaic, woodwork, metalwork, handicrafts, costumes, and indigenous textiles."

The Copyright Act protects expressions of folklore against reproduction; communication
to the public by performance, broadcasting, distribution by cable or other means;
adaptation, translation and other transformations, when such expressions are made either
for commercial purposes or outside their traditional or customary context.

The NCC is vested with the power to authorise the exploitation of the expressions of
folklore in Nigeria by third parties. However, the NCC's powers are limited by stipulated
exceptions such as fair dealing, educational use, use for illustrations, incidental uses and
the borrowing of expressions of folklore for creating an original work. The Copyright Act
requires the community of origin of an expression of folklore to be duly acknowledge in
all printed matters that the expression of folklore is being utilised, especially where such
printed matter is being communicated to the public. Further, in terms of section 32 of the
Copyright Act, infringing uses of expressions of folklore are breach of statutory duty
against which damages, injunctions and any other remedies may be granted by the court
at the suit of the NCC. The Copyright Act also provides criminal sanctions for

                                                                                                                125
infringement of expressions of folklore. In this connection, an infringer would be liable
upon conviction to a fine not exceeding N100,000 or 12months imprisonment or both in
the case of an individual and a fine of N500,000 in the case of a corporate entity.

                                SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 9

    There is no need to search for or develop a specific legal framework for the protection
    of TK, TCEs and GRs because they can safely be protected under existing intellectual
    property regimes. Do you agree with this claim?

1.6 Summary
      In this Unit, we have defined TK, TCEs and GRs and surveyed the developments,
      strategies, and approaches to their protection both at the global, regional and national
      levels, especially in Nigeria. In particular, we identified the challenges and successes of
      the WIPO IGC in its quest to develop an international normative framework for the
      protection of TK, TCEs and GRs. We also examined the protection of TK, TCEs and GRs
      in Nigeria, find that only TCEs finds some sought of protection in Nigeria, particularly
      under the Copyright Act.

1.7 References/Further Readings/Web Sources

1) VK Gupta, `Protecting India's Traditional Knowledge' (2011) 3 WIPO Magazine 5-8,

https://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/wipo_magazine/en/pdf/2011/wipo_pub_121_2

011_03.pdf

2) WIPO, Intellectual Property, Genetic Resources, Traditional Knowledge and

Traditional  Cultural   Expressions                      (WIPO,     2015),

https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/tk/933/wipo_pub_933.pdf

3) WIPO, Key Questions on Patent Disclosure Requirements for Genetic Resources and

Traditional  Knowledge                       (WIPO,                 2017),

https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_1047.pdf

4) B Vezina `Traditional Cultural Expressions Laying Blocks for an: International

Agreement'   (2018)    GIGI                  Papers            No.             169,

https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/documents/Paper%20no.169_1.pdf

                                                                                                   126
5) C Oguamanam, `Tiered or Differentiated Approach to Traditional Knowledge and

Traditional Cultural Expressions: The Evolution of a Concept' CIGI Papers No. 185,

August                                                                    2018,

https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/documents/Paper%20no.185web_0.pdf

6) RL Okediji, `Traditional Knowledge and the Public Domain' CIGI Papers No. 176,

June                                                                      2018,

https://www.cigionline.org/sites/default/files/documents/Paper%20no.176web.pdf

7) WIPO-IGC 27th Session, `Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural

Expressions: Certain Suggested Cross-Cutting Issues', WIPO/GRTKF/IC/27/INF/10,

2014, www.wipo.int/meetings/en/doc_details.jsp?doc_id=269068

8) W McCook, `Traditional Knowledge and Traditional Cultural Expressions: Certain

suggested         cross-cutting  issues'                  Non-paper,      2014,

www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/tk/en/igc/pdf/igc_27_issues.pdf

9) W Wendland, `Protecting indigenous knowledge: a personal perspective on

international negotiations at WIPO' (2019) 6 WIPO Magazine 23-31,

https://www.wipo.int/wipo_magazine/en/2019/06/article_0004.html

10) F Kariuki, `Notion of `Ownership' in IP: Protection of Traditional Ecological

Knowledge vis-a-vis Protection of T K and Cultural Expressions Act, 2016 of Kenya'

(2019) 24 Journal of Intellectual Property Rights 89-102

11) L Tong, `Aligning the South African intellectual property system with traditional

knowledge protection' (2017) 12 (3) Journal of Intellectual Property Law and

Practice 179-190

12) A Adewopo, et al, `A consideration of communal trademarks for Nigerian leather and

textile products', in J de Beer, et al (eds). Innovation & Intellectual Property:

Collaborative Dynamics in Africa (UCT Press, 2014) 109-131

13) A Adewopo, `Protection and administration of folklore in Nigeria' (2016) 3(1)

SCRIPT-ed, https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1127645

14) DO Oriakhogba and AI Fenemigho `Exploring the Intellectual Property, Traditional

Cultural Expression, and Gender Dimensions of the Benin Bronze Casting Art: An

Agenda for Research' in FFO Orunmwense, et al National Development and Human

Security (Benin: University of Benin, 2019) 84-105

15) DO Oriakhogba `Empowering rural women crafters in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa:

the dynamics of intellectual property, traditional cultural expressions, innovation and

social entrepreneurship' (2020) 137(1) South African Law Journal 145-172

                                                                                         127
16) G Dutfield and U Suthersanen, `Traditional Knowledge and Genetic

Resources: Observing Legal Protection through the Lens of Historical Geography and

Human                 Rights                                                (2018),

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3282818##

17) A Oyewunmi, Nigerian Law of Intellectual Property (Unilag Press, 2015)

18) CN Ncube and E du Plessis (eds) Indigenous Knowledge & Intellectual Property

(Juta, 2016)

19) E Wright, Protecting Traditional Knowledge: Lessons From Global Case Studies

(Edward Elgar, 2020)

                                                                                     128
MODULE 4 SELECTED EMERGING INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY ISSUES

Unit 2: Digitization and intellectual property

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Patent law
2.4 Trademark law
2.5 Copyright law
2.6 Duty of Publishers, etc to Maintain Register
2.7 Summary
2.8 References Further Reading/Web Sources

2.1 Introduction
       Digitisation affords both challenges and opportunities within the context of intellectual
       property. The challenges and opportunities of digitisation are underpinned by the
       borderless nature of the Internet, the geographic limitations of intellectual property rights
       enforcement, the fragmentation of licensing practices, the proliferation of distribution
       channels for creative and innovative works, and the disruptive nature of the internet that
       has brought abought the possibility of quick, easy and efficient ways of creating,
       managing and infringing intellectual property. Digitisation has greatly enabled
       technologies such 3D printing, blockchain and artificial intelligence (AI). Studies show
       that the impact of digitisation is most acutely felt within the copyright sector. This is not
       to contend that the impact of digitisation is not felt within other intellectual property
       sectors, such as patent and trademarks. We discuss the impact of digitisation on specific
       intellectual property in this unit.

2.2 Learning Outcome
       At the completion of this Unit, you should be able to explain the challenges and
       opportunities of digitisation within intellectual property (patent, trademark and
       copyright) systems.

                                                                                                                     129
2.3 Patent law
      In the area of patent law, for instance, the impact of digitisation is felt in the opportunities
      and challenges it offers inventors, especially in the development and use of AI in
      inventive activities. AI has been broadly defined as "the ability of digital computer or
      computer-controlled robot to perform tasks commonly associated with intelligent beings.
      The term is frequently applied to the project of developing systems endowed with
      intellectual processes characteristic of humans, such as the ability to reason, discover
      meaning, generalise or learn from past experiences". It is also described as "the theory
      and development of computer systems able to perform tasks normally requiring human
      intelligence, such as visual perception, speech recognition, decision making, and
      translation between languages". The smart phones and other smart devices in use today
      are AI powered. Examples include, Google Assistance, Google GPRS device, Alexa, Siri
      and Bixby, to mention a few.

      The first challenged here is to determine whether AI qualifies as patentable subject matter
      under patent law. In terms of section 1 of the Patent and Designs Act (PDA), inventions
      are patentable in Nigeria if they are new or novel, results from inventive activities and
      are capable of industrial application; or if they are new or novel improvement on an
      existing patentable invention that arose from an inventive activity and capable of
      industrial application. In this connection, section 1(4) and (5) of the PDA specifically
      excludes from patentability, inventions relating to plant or animal varieties, or essentially
      biological process for production of plants or animals (other than microbiological
      processes and their products); inventions the publication or exploitation of which would
      be contrary to public order or morality; and principles and discoveries of a scientific
      nature are not inventions for the purposes of the PDA.

      It is not clear from the foregoing whether this provision can be stretched to exclude AI,
      which, as shown above, can be regarded as a mere computer program or software, as a
      patentable subject matter under the PDA. This is so because, the PDA does not expressly
      exclude computer programs or software from its ambit unlike section 25(2) of the South
      African Patent Act, No. 56 of 1978, which clearly excludes computer programs or
      software and methods of doing business, among others from patentability. It can,
      however, be argued that the non-express exclusion of computer program or software as
      patentable subject matter under the PDA may be interpreted to mean patents can be

                                                                                                                    130
granted over AI inventions in Nigeria. This argument finds support in the recent treatise
of Adewopo where he stated that the patentability requirements in the PDA

     "define the standard test which every invention must pass thoroughly in order to
     be patentable under Nigerian patent law and this applies mutatis mutandis to
     software. In other words, there is no specific or separate provision on patentability
     or otherwise of software once it satisfies the general criteria. Software is not
     expressly excluded or prohibited from being patentable under the PDA. It is
     important to note that in satisfying the patentability criteria, particularly the
     inventive step and its application, the patent will protect elements of function,
     technical solutions and how the software behaves in meeting those criteria.".

Aside AI being a patentable subject matter (or not), it offers enormous opportunities for
intellectual property. For instance, it is possible to deploy AI into certain use cases within
the intellectual property framework, such as in the areas of enforcement, monitoring,
evaluation or assessment of patent applications, and even in the creation of patentable
inventions. Indeed, the major issue in modern times are centred around AI-generated
inventions: that is, inventions autonomously and solely developed by AI. It is now
possible for innovators to develop AI devices that will play a major role in their inventive
activities. The consequence of this is that such innovators are now naming the AI devices
as co-inventors in their patent application related to the inventions which they developed
with the aid of the AI, and, as such, are challenging the established norms around
inventorship (the foundation of patent law centres around the "human inventor").

Put differently, with the development and deployment of AI in inventive activities,
questions are now being asked as to whether patent law cannot be stretched to
accommodate the "non-human or AI inventor". Such issue has not arisen in Nigeria yet.
Nonetheless, there is a case that recently arose involving the naming of an AI as the
autonomous and sole inventor, with the developers of the AI as the patent applicant and
owners of the prospective patent, in international patent filings in August 2019 under
Patent Cooperation Treaty system. The applications were also filed in jurisdictions
including the European Patent Office (EPO) and the United Kingdom Intellectual
Property Office (UKIPO). The AI, developed by Dr Stephen Thaler, was christened
"Device for the Autonomous Bootstrapping of Unified Sentience" (DABUS).

                                                                                                              131
      Both the EPO and UKIPO did not hesitate to refuse the respective applications. In the
      case of the UKIPO (see UKIPO Decision BL O/741/19 of 4 December 2019 in Stephen
      L Thaler Application), the Hearing Officer actually agreed that the invention subject of
      the application was created by DABUS, but that since DABUS was an AI (a machine)
      and not human, it does not qualify as an inventor under UK patent law. As such, DABUS
      could not also validly transfer ownership of the invention to members of the team who
      sought the patent grant.

      Similarly, the EPO ruled that the patent applications do not meet the required of article
      81 and Rule 19 of the European Patent Convention, which requires that an inventor
      designated in a patent application has to be a human being and not AI (a machine) (see
      Grounds for the EPO decision of 27 January 2020 on EP 18 275 163 and Grounds for the
      EPO decision of 27 January 2020 on EP 18 275 174). It is important to note that the team
      members have indicated their willingness to appeal against these ruling. This signifies
      that the end is yet to be reach as to status of AI in respect of ownership of intellectual
      property rights. Indeed, both the WIPO and the United States Patent and Trademarks
      Office (USPTO) are already seeking to develop, through public consultations, issues of
      focus concerning AI and intellectual property law and policy that will shape future
      discussions.

2.4 Trademark law
      As the issue has not arisen in Nigerian courts, Two South African cases can be used to
      illustrate the impact of digitisation on trademarks: New Media v Eating Out 2005 (5) SA
      388 and Laugh it Off v SAB [2005] ZACC 7. The New Media case considered whether
      the respondents domain names www.eating-out.co.za and www.eatingout.co.za
      infringed the applicant's registered trademark, EAT OUT GUIDE. Here, the South
      African High Court Held that the domain names in dispute are capable of deceiving users
      of the applicant's restaurant guide.

      Importantly, the Laugh it Off case relates to the use of the respondent's well-known
      respondent trademark (CARLING BLACK LABEL) on the applicant's T-Shirt (by way
      of parody) advertised on the internet, and it relates to the interface between the right to
      freedom of expression on the internet and the exercise of the trademarks. In the case, the
      Constitutional Court of South Africa had to determine the question of when a trademark

                                                                                                                    132
can be said to have been infringed under section 34 of the South African Trade Marks
Act, No. 194 of 1993. The court determined this question against the backdrop of the
exercise of the right to freedom of expression (on the internet) guaranteed under section

16 of the Constitution of the Republic of South Africa 1996. In holding that no
infringement occurred because the use does not occasion any likelihood of economic
detriment to the respondent, the South African Constitutional Court made the following
pronouncement:

   "section 34 [of the Trade Mark Act] serves a vital purpose in preserving trade and
   commercial interests of owners of trade marks which have a reputation. This it does
   by prohibiting use which, although it may not confuse or deceive, materially
   undermines the repute of well renowned trademarks ordinarily harnessed to sell
   goods and services. The protection must be seen to extend beyond the traditional
   and primary function of a trademark, which is to signify the origin of goods and
   services on offer. Rather, the section aims at more than safeguarding a product's
   "badge of origin" or its "source-denoting function". The section strives to protect
   the unique identity and reputation of a registered trade mark. Both of these attributes
   underpin the economic value that resides in the mark's advertising prowess or
   selling power. As it is often said the mark sells the goods and therefore its positive
   image or consumer appeal must be saved from ruin. [...] section 34 falls to be
   construed bearing in mind the entrenched free expression right under section 16 [of
   the Constitution]. [...] Plainly, the right to free expression in our Constitution is
   neither paramount over other guaranteed rights nor limitless. [...]. In appropriate
   circumstances authorised by the Constitution itself, a law of general application
   may limit freedom of expression. [...] section 34 [Trade Marks Act] seeks, in effect,
   to oust certain expressive conduct in relation to registered marks with repute. It thus
   limits the right to free expression embodied in at least section 16(1)(a) to (c) of the
   Constitution. We are however not seized with the adjudication of the constitutional
   validity of the section. We must assume without deciding that the limitation is
   reasonable and justifiable in an open and democratic society to which our
   Constitution is committed. That in turn impels us to a construction of section 34
   most compatible with the right to free expression. The anti-dilution provision must
   bear a meaning which is the least destructive of other entrenched rights and in this
   case free expression rights. The reach of the statutory prohibition must be curtailed
   to the least intrusive means necessary to achieve the purpose of the section. Courts
   must be astute not to convert the anti-dilution safeguard of renowned trademarks
   usually controlled by powerful financial interests into a monopoly adverse to other
   claims of expressive conduct of at least equal cogency and worth in our broader
   society."

                                                                                                              133
2.5 Copyright Law
      The challenges thrown up by digitisation in relation to copyright and related rights
      include questions of the nature of rights associated with digital contents, protection of
      the rights, the extent and manner of enforcement of such rights, and the extent to which
      foundational concepts such as authorship and ownership of copyright can be stretched to
      accommodate non-human creators such as AI since, as pointed out above, AI also
      independently create protectable works. The challenges of digitisation also include
      questions of applicable law in respect of rights infringement on the internet and questions
      around data ownership and protection under copyright law.

      Negotiations at the international level led to attempts to answer the question of the nature
      of rights for digital contents. In 1996, two WIPO treaties ­ WIPO Copyright Treaty
      (WCT) and WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT) ­ where adopted. The
      Beijing Treaty on Audiovisual Performance (BTAP) was also adopted in 2012. Nigeria
      ratified these treaties in October 2017. Under the treaties, the main exclusive rights that
      are relevant in the digital environment are the reproduction rights and the rights of
      communication to the public including the right of making available to the public (WCT,
      Article 8; WPPT Articles 7, 10, 11 and 14; BTAP, Articles 7, 10 and 11). The BTAP
      includes the rights of broadcasting and communication to the public as exclusive rights,
      but allows member states the liberty to reduce such rights to equitable remuneration
      rights. Performers and producers of phonograms are also entitled, in addition to the
      exclusive rights, the right to a single equitable remuneration for the direct or indirect use
      of phonograms published for commercial purposes for broadcasting or for any
      communication to the public. It appears that state parties are allowed to choose whether
      to include these rights as exclusive or mere remuneration rights in their national
      legislation (BTAP, Article 11). The treaties further attempt to answer the question of
      rights protection in the digital sphere by making provisions relating to technological
      protection measures (TPM) and rights management information (RMI). RMI help to
      identify a work and its owner, among others, and can help to track usages of a work and
      distribute collected revenues. On the other hand, TPM help to prevent unauthorised uses
      of works either through access control mechanism (passwords or encryption) or copy
      control mechanisms (limiting number of authorised copies) (WCT, Articles 11 and 12;
      WPPT, Articles 18 and 19; BTAP, Articles 15 and 16). The Draft Copyright Bill, which

                                                                                                                    134
seeks to domesticate the WCT, WPPT and BTAP, among others, contains similar
provisions.

A major issue with regards to enforcement of rights in the digital sphere is the conditions
under and the extent to which Internet Service Providers (ISPs) can be held liable for
infringement of rights, especially those caused by users of their services. Related to this
is the issue of how to safeguard the rights to privacy and freedom of speech of Internet
users in the course of copyright enforcement. The WIPO Internet treaties do not provide
for enforcement of copyrights in the digital sphere against ISPs. According to the Agreed
Statement on the WCT, it "is understood that the mere provision of physical facilities for
enabling or making a communication does not in itself amount to communication within
the meaning of this Treaty or the Berne Convention". The conditions and extent of
liability of ISPs is the concern of national legislatures. At the national level, different
approaches exist. There are those that adopt the graduated response approach (the so
called three-strike law) or those that merely place obligation on ISPs to reveal
information about Internet users hiding behind anonymous IP-addresses to infringe
copyright works. There are countries wherein industry agreements govern, or
complement national legislation in, the enforcement of rights against ISPs, and those who
adopt the more widely used notice-and-down approach.

The extent Copyright Act does not contain any of these approaches. However, the notice-
and-down approach is currently being proposed in clauses 47 and 48 of the DCB as
follows:

   "47 (1) The owner of copyright in a work in respect of which copyright has been
   infringed, may issue notice of such infringement to the relevant service provider
   requesting the service provider to take down or disable access to any infringing
   content or link to such content, hosted on its systems or networks.
   (2) To be effective under this section, a notification of an alleged infringement must
   be made in writing to the service provider or his designated agent and must include
   substantially the following--
   (a) a physical or electronic signature of a person authorized to act on behalf of the
   owner of an exclusive right that is allegedly infringed; (b) identification of each
   work claimed to have been infringed; (c) identification of the material that is
   claimed to be infringing or to be the subject of infringing activity and that is to be
   removed or access to which is to be disabled, and information reasonably sufficient

                                                                                                              135
   to permit the service provider to locate the material (d) information reasonably
   sufficient to permit the service provider to contact the complaining party, such as
   an electronic mail address, telephone number, or a location address at which the
   complaining party may be contacted; (e) a statement under penalty of perjury that
   the complaining party has a good faith belief that use of the material in the manner
   complained of is not authorized by the owner of copyright or his agent, or the law;
   and (f) a statement that the information in the notification is accurate, and that the
   complaining party is authorized to act on behalf of the owner of an exclusive right
   that is allegedly infringed.
   (3) As used in this Act, the term service provider means a provider of online
   services or network access, or the operator of facilities therefor, and includes an
   entity offering the transmission, routing, or providing of connections for digital
   online communications, between or among points specified by a user, of material
   of the user's choosing, without modification to the content of the material as sent or
   received."

   "48(1) A service provider, upon receiving notice of infringement under section47
   shall promptly notify the subscriber responsible for the content for which the notice
   relates informing him of the content of the notice;
   (2) If within 10 days of having notified the subscriber, the subscriber fails to provide
   any information justifying the continued keeping of the content complained about,
   the service provider shall take down or disable access to the infringing content or
   links to such content hosted on its systems or networks, and thereafter, notify the
   owner of copyright accordingly.
   (3) Where a subscriber has provided information justifying the keeping of the
   content complained about, or the service provider is otherwise convinced that the
   complaint of the owner of copyright is without merit, he shall promptly inform the
   owner of copyright of his decision not to take down the content.
   (4) The service provider may resume access to or restore removed content or a link,
   if he receives a written counter notice from the subscriber which he has forwarded
   to the owner of copyright immediately upon receipt; and he did not receive, within
   10 days, a notice from the owner of copyright, indicating that no authorization has
   been granted for the subscriber to make the content available.
   (5) Any person dissatisfied with a determination or action by the service provider
   or owner of copyright under this section may refer the matter to the Commission
   for determination.
   (6) A service provider shall not be liable to any person for any action taken under
   this section in good faith."

Another area where the opportunities and challenges of digitisation manifests in the

copyright sector is in relation to the AI technology. As already now over-flogged, AI are

capable of creating protectable works either autonomously or in conjunction with a

                                                                                                              136
human author. Indeed, evidence abound of paintings, music, novels, pictures, sound
recordings, among others created by AI and these qualify as works under the Copyright
Act. As already pointed out earlier in this course, the Copyright Act only recognises
human authors in respect of authorial works such as literary, musical and artistic works.
Authorship in respect of other works such as cinematograph films, sound recordings and
broadcast vest in human or artificial (corporate) persons who invests or bore the
economic expense in creating the works. Thus, the challenge, is whether the concepts of
authorship and ownership of copyright under the Copyright Act can be interpreted to
extend to non-human authors, such as AI in respect of a protectable work. This issue has
not been answered in a Nigeria court. Even so, it is highly doubtful whether the Nigerian
courts will rule in favour of vesting authorship on AI in view the existing precedence on
authorship in Nigeria. However, the Nigerian courts may draw guidance from other
jurisdictions, such as China, when such issues arise before them.

The question whether copyright law should extend protection to works created by AI
recently attracted judicial attention in of the Beijing Internet Court (BIC), China, in the
case of Beijing Feilin Law Firm v Baidu Corporation, No 239 [2019], Civil First
Instance, 25 April 2019. A review of the case by Ming Chen is available in the Journal
of Intellectual Property Law & Practice (2019) 14(8) 593 ­ 594. Gleaned from the
review, the plaintiff claimed that the defendant (an ISP) infringed its right of
communication of information on networks" (similar to the making available right). The
claim related to a report published by the plaintiff on its' WeChat account. The report
was a summary of some data about judicial [decisions] on the film industry in Beijing.
The data was drawn from an electronic database (Wolter Kluwer legal database)
containing graphics and Chinese texts providing information such as the total number
and trend, the workload of every court in Beijing, the rate to hire lawyers among others,
relating to judgments on the Beijing film industry. Without authorisation of the plaintiff,
the report was posted on the defendant's internet platform by a third party. In its defence,
the defendant argued that the report in issue was not copyright protected because it was
created by AI.

In its judgment, the BIC distinguished the texts of the report itself and those in the
electronic database which formed the foundation for the report. The BIC found that the
texts in the report were indeed expressed by the plaintiff and, consequently, subject to

                                                                                                              137
      copyright protection. However, the BIC refused to extend protection over the texts and
      graphics contained in the electronic database. The judgment of the BIC turned on whether
      the relevant texts and graphics in the electronic database were sufficiently original under
      the Copyright Law of the Peoples' Republic of China. In this regard, the BIC held that
      the graphics were not original to the plaintiff because the graphics were created by AI
      based on data inputted by the plaintiff. Also, the court reasoned that the variation of [the]
      graphics was attributable to the change in the data and different users of the database
      would get the same result if they used exactly the same data. Moreover, it was held that
      the plaintiff did not provide extra evidence to prove that they had done some additional
      choices in relation to the lines and colours in order to show originality. Concerning the
      texts in the electronic database, the BIC held that they were sufficiently original.
      However, the BIC held that the texts were generated by AI. As such, they cannot be
      protected because under Chinese copyright law, protection does not extend to works
      created by AI. Article 11 of Chinese copyright law only accommodates works created by
      humans, or legal persons and entities without legal personality.

                                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 10
                   What are the impacts of digitisation on the global and national
                   intellectual property systems?

2.6 Summary
      In this Unit, we have discussed the impact of digitization on intellectual property. In this
      connection, attention was paid to the challenges and opportunities which digitization
      affords specific intellectual property such as patent, trademark and copyright. The
      discussion focused on the global developments in this regard before situating the
      discussion within the Nigerian context.

2.7 Further readings and acknowledgement
       1) A Adewopo, `Intellectual property protection for software: a global perspective and
           lessons for development and reforms in Nigeria' (2019) 7 South African IP L. J. 1-
           30 @ 9

                                                                                                                    138
2) WIPO Technology Trends 2019: Artificial Intelligence (WIPO, 2019),

https://www.wipo.int/edocs/pubdocs/en/wipo_pub_1055.pdf

3) M Malaurie-Vignal, `Blockchain, intellectual property and fashion' (2020) 15(2)

Journal of Intellectual Property Law and Practice 92-97

4) DO Oriakhogba, `Beijing Internet Court refuses copyright for AI created work', 10

September 2019, http://www.ipchair.uct.ac.za/news/beijing-internet-court-refuses-

copyright-ai-created-work

5) R Abbott, `The Artificial Inventor Project' (2019) 6 WIPO Magazine 8-13,

https://www.wipo.int/export/sites/www/wipo_magazine/en/pdf/2019/wipo_pub_121

_2019_06.pdf

6) WIPO, `Public Consultation on AI and IP Policy ­ Submissions',

https://www.wipo.int/about-ip/en/artificial_intelligence/submissions-search.jsp

7) USPTO, `Request for Comments on Intellectual Property Protection for Artificial

Intelligence   Innovation',              30              October             2019,

https://www.federalregister.gov/documents/2019/10/30/2019-23638/request-for-

comments-on-intellectual-property-protection-for-artificial-intelligence-innovation

8) CB Ncube `From the law reports: Laugh It Off Promotions CC v South African

Breweries International (Finance) B V T/A Sabmark International' (2005) 1

Codicillus 82

9) Draft       Copyright   Bill,         http://graduatedresponse.org/new/wp-

content/uploads/2016/02/DRAFT_COPYRIGHT_BILL_NOVEMBER-_2015.pdf

10) DO Oriakhogba 'Bringing the WIPO Internet treaties, audiovisual performances and

Marrakesh VIP treaties in tune with the access to knowledge and development

demands in Nigeria' (2018) 5(1) ABUAD Journal of Public and International Law

44-57

11) UKIPO Decision BL O/741/19 of 4 December 2019 in Stephen L Thaler

Application, https://www.ipo.gov.uk/p-challenge-decision-results/o74119.pdf

12) J Nurton, `EPO and UKIPO Refuse AI-Invented Patent Applications', 7 January

2020, IP Watchdog, https://www.ipwatchdog.com/2020/01/07/epo-ukipo-refuse-ai-

invented-patent-applications/id=117648/

13) Grounds for the EPO decision of 27 January 2020 on EP 18 275 163,

https://register.epo.org/application?documentId=E4B63SD62191498&number=EP

18275163&lng=en&npl=false

                                                                                      139
14) Grounds for the EPO decision of 27 January 2020 on EP 18 275 174,
      https://register.epo.org/application?documentId=E4B63OBI2076498&number=EP
      18275174&lng=en&npl=false

15) CB Ncube `Copyright enforcement: the graduated response takes centre stage (2012)
      24 South Africa Mercantile Law Journal 133-147

16) PB Hugenholtz `Codes of Conduct and Copyright Enforcement in Cyberspace' in
      IA Stamatoudi (ed.) Copyright Enforcement and the Internet (2010) 303-320

17) B Faturoti `Re-importing the concept of `authorisation' of copyright infringement to
      Nigeria from the UK and Australia' (2017) 31(1) International Review of Law,
      Computers and Technology 4-25.

18) WIPO `Agreed Statement Concerning the WIPO Copyright Treaty' (1996),
      http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/text.jsp?file_id=295456

19) Ming Chen, `Beijing Internet Court denies copyright to works created solely by
      artificial intelligence' (2019) 14(8) Journal of Intellectual Property Law & Practice
      593 ­ 594

20) D Mendis, et al (eds), 3D Printing and Beyond: Intellectual Property and Regulation
      (Edward Elgar, 2019)

                                                                                                               140
