   NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
        SCHOOL OF POSTGRADUATE STUDIES

                  FACULTY OF LAW

                  COURSE CODE: CLL815

COURSE TITLE: LAW OF BANKING AND NEGOTIABLE

                            INSTRUMENTS I

                                                                                                                         1
       NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

Headquarters
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone,
University Village,
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway,
JABI - ABUJA
URL: www.nou.edu.ng

Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos

Published by
National Open University of Nigeria

Printed
ISBN:

All Rights Reserved

                                                                                                                              2
Course Code:    COURSE INFORMATION

                           CLL815

Course Title:          LAW OF BANKING AND
                       NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS I

Credit Unit:           3

Pre-Requisite Course:

Course Status:         C

Semester:              ONE

Required Study Hours:

Edition:               2022

                                                 3
                        COURSE TEAM

Course Developers/Writers:  Dr Monday O. Oseghale and
                            Dr. F.O. Olumese

Course Editor:              Dr Ernest O. Ugbejeh

Programme Leader:           Dr Ernest O. Ugbejeh

Programme Coordinator:      F.O. ONAMSON, PhD

                                                       4
TABLE OF CONTENTS                      PAGE
Introduction
Course Learning Outcomes
Working through this course
Course Materials
Study Units
Textbooks and Reference
Assessment
Tutor Marked Assignment
Final Examination and Grading
Course Score Distribution
Course Overview/Presentation
How to get the most from this course.
Tutors and Tutorials.
Summary

                                             5
CLL815 ­ LAW OF BANKING AND NEGOTIABLE INSTRUMENTS I

COURSE GUIDE

INTRODUCTION

Pre-Banking business in Nigeria before [1892]; History/Evolution and Nature of Banking business
in Nigeria; Concepts of Bank, Banker and Banking Business; Types, Functions and Structures of
Banking Business in Nigeria; Banker and Customer Relationship, Bankers Duties to Customers
and Banker's Protection; Customer's Duties to the Banker; The Paying and Collecting Banker;
Conversion and Forgeries, Securities for Advances and Bankers Commercial Credit; Banks and
Other Financial Institutions business Regulatory Framework; Concept and Types of Negotiable
and Quasi-Negotiable Instruments; Types, Features / Elements, Acceptance, Delivery, Drawing,
Endorsement, Holder in due course; Presentation, Dishonor, Discharge and the Law regulating the
Bills of Exchange and Promissory Notes and the Governing law; Inchoate Bills; the Law of
Bankruptcy; Concept and History / Evolution of E-Banking; Types and Features of E-Banking;
Benefits of E-Banking; Problems and Challenges of E-Banking; Regulatory Framework, Reforms
/ Supervisory change of Management of E-Banking and Recommendations for movement towards
sustainable development, promulgation / repeal / review of regulatory framework, Training and
retraining of staff, Public Enlightenment and Sensitization of Bankers and Customers towards
Internet Communication Technology [ICT], Conversions of Investments to Returns and tailoring
existing management guidelines / Framework along Domestic jurisdiction of E-Banking etc.

Prior to 1892, there was no banking business in Nigeria until the South Africans established a
branch of the Banking Corporation in Lagos in the year 1892 and this, marked the beginning of
banking business in Nigeria. Earlier than the advent of money was Trade by Barter as the medium
of exchange and which difficulties triggered the advent of money without which there would not
have been banking business. So, the advent of money is a milestone in the history / evolution of
banking business in Nigeria while the ever-increasing technological advancement and desire for a
cashless society following the huge benefits, has further triggered the advent of E-Banking. It is
important to mention that earlier than 1952, there were no banking regulations and thus, bank
customers and investors were swindled till the promulgation of the Bills of Exchange Acts of 1917
and re-enacted in 1964, 1990 and of now 2004; then the Nigerian Industrial Development Bank
[NIDB] of 1959 meant to issue the first Federal Government public loans, shares and stocks, then

                                                                                                                              6
the Treasury Bill Ordinance No. 11 of 1959 that was repealed as the Treasury Bill of 1960 by the
Barbeck Committee Report of 1960, the Banking Amendment Act [CAP 19] of 1962 etc. Nigerian
Deposit Insurance Corporation Decree [NDICD] of 1990 and re-enacted as Decree No. 5 of 1997
now; Nigerian Deposit Insurance Corporation Act CapN102 LFN.2004; Banking Ordinance of
1952 which was quickly followed by the Central Bank Act of 1959; the Banks and Other Financial
Institutions Decree No. 25 of 1991 now Act 2004; Nigerian Import-Export Bank Decree No. 38 of
1991 [NEXIM] etc. However, due to the advancement in technology and increased banking
activities, banking regulations have evolved by amendments, repeals / reviews or outright
promulgation of new regulations that will continue to evolve due to contemporary changes in
banking business even though that, where the laws are still relevant, they are retained for academic
exercise purposes. The modules on E-Banking and a few others are restructured to suit
contemporary changes having not been put into cognizance.

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE

To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, recommended books, relevant
cases and other materials provided by NOUN. Each unit contains a Self-Assessment Exercise, and
at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes. At the end
of the course there is a final examination. The course should take you about 13 weeks to complete.
You will find all the components of the course listed below. You need to make out time for each
unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.

COURSE MATERIALS
The major components of the course are.

    a) Course guide.
    b) Study Units.
    c) Textbooks
    d) Assignment file/Seminar Paper
    e) Presentation schedule.

                                                                                                                              7
MODULES AND STUDY UNITS

The discussion in this course is broken down to eight (8) study units that are broadly divided into

six (6) modules as follows ­

MODULE 1  THE PRE-BANKING BUSINESS ERA IN NIGERIA

Unit 1    The Concept of Pre-Banking and Trade by Barter in Nigeria

MODULE 2  HISTORY / EVOLUTION AND THE NATURE OF BANKING
          BUSINESS IN NIGERIA

Unit 1    History / Evolution and the Nature of Banking Business in Nigeria

MODULE 3  THE CONCEPT OF A BANK, BANKER, AND BANKING
          BUSINESS

Unit 1    The Concept of `Bank,' `Banker' and `Banking Business' in Nigeria

Unit 2    Concept of the word "Customer" and the Features / Nature of Banker
          Customer Relationship

MODULE 4  DUTIES OF A BANKER TO A CUSTOMER AND THE RIGHTS /
          DEFENCES OF A BANKER

Unit 1    Rights and Obligations in a banker-customer relationship

MODULE 5  NATURE, TYPES, FUNCTINS AND STRUCTURE OF THE
          BANKING SYSTEM IN NIGERIA

Unit 1    Types, Functions and Structure of Banking in Nigeria

Unit 2    OTHER SPECIALIZED BANKS

MODULE 6  INTRODUCTIN OF UNIVERSAL BANKING SYSTEM [UBS] 2000

Unit 1    Universal Banking System [UBS], 2000

All these Units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and values, which merit your
attention and thought. Tackle them in separate study periods. You may require several hours for

                                                                                                                              8
each. We suggest that the Modules be studied one after the other, since they are linked by a
common theme. You will gain more from them if you have first carried out work on the law of
contract. You will then have a clearer picture into which to paint these topics. Subsequent units
are written on the assumption that you have completed previous Units.
Each study unit consists of one week's work and includes specific Learning Outcomes, directions
for study, reading materials and Self-Assessment Exercises (SAE). Together, these exercises will
assist you in achieving the stated Learning Outcomes of the individual units and of the course.

REFERENCES / FURTHER READING
References and further reading materials are provided at the end of each study unit. The need to
consult these materials cannot be overemphasized to deepen and broaden understanding of the
issues at stake. You should read them where so directed before attempting the exercise.

ASSESSMENT
There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor Marked Assignments and a
written examination. In doing these assignments you are expected to apply knowledge acquired
during the course. The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file. The
work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
Self-assessment questions are raised at the end of each module to measure the level of successful
engagement with the legal issues covered. The answers in the body of the main text are distilled
and put up at the end of the course material. This will enable you to understand and apply legal
principles to practical situations in resolving legal matters in the field of marine insurance law.

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING
                                                                                                                              9
The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and will carry 70% of the total
course grade. The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the kinds of self-assessment
exercises and the tutor marked problems you have previously encountered. All aspects of the
course will be assessed. You should use the time between completing the last unit and taking the
examination to revise the entire course. You may find it useful to review yourself assessment
exercises and tutor marked assignments before the examination.

COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.

Assessment                                 Marks

Assignments 1-4 (the best three of all the Four assignments. Best three marks of the four

assignments submitted)                     counts at 30% of course marks.

Final examination                          70% of overall course score

Total                                      100% of course score.

Course Overview and Presentation Schedule

Module / Unit           Title of Work                             Weeks        Assessment
                                                                  Activity     (End of Unit)

MODULE 1 THE PRE-BANKING BUSINESS ERA IN
                    NIGERIA

Unit 1         The Concept of Pre-Banking and Trade by Barter in            1  Assignment 1

               Nigeria

MODULE 2 HISTORY / EVOLUTION AND THE NATURE
                    OF BANKING BUSINESS IN NIGERIA

                                                                               10
Unit 1    History / Evolution and the Nature of Banking      2  Assignment 4
          Business in Nigeria

MODULE 3 THE CONCEPT OF A BANK, BANKER, AND
                    BANKING BUSINESS

Unit 1    The Concept of `Bank,' `Banker' and `Banking       3  Assignment 9
          Business' in Nigeria

Unit 2    Concept of the word "Customer" and the Features /  4

          Nature of Banker Customer Relationship

MODULE 4  DUTIES OF A BANKER TO A CUSTOMER
          AND THE RIGHTS / DEFENCES OF A
          BANKER

Unit 1    Rights and Obligations in a banker-customer        5

          relationship

MODULE 5  NATURE, TYPES, FUNCTINS AND
          STRUCTURE OF THE BANKING SYSTEM IN
          NIGERIA

Unit 1    Types, Functions and Structure of Banking in       6

          Nigeria

Unit 2    OTHER SPECIALIZED BANKS                            7 Assignment 12

Unit 3    Universal Banking System [UBS], 2000               8

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THE COURSE.
It is very important that the discussion on this course is participatory. Therefore, you will benefit
from taking part in all the facilitation classes. It is equally important that you take steps to consult
the references for further reading in each Unit. The effusive references to provisions of the relevant
laws in the course guide is to enable you to become very familiar with the law.

                                                                                                                             11
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS
There are 12 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You will be notified of the dates,
times and location of the tutorials, together with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon
as you are allocated a tutorial group. Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments.
Keep a close watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter. Your tutor may
help you during the course. You must send your Tutor Marked Assignments to your tutor well
before the due date. They will be marked by your tutor and returned to you as soon as possible.
Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if:

      You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
      You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
      You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor's comments on an

          assignment or with the grading of an assignment.
You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance to have face to face contact
with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly. You can raise any problem
encountered in the course of your study. To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials,
prepare a question list before attending them. You will gain a lot from participating actively.

                                                                                                                             12
                       TABLE OF CONTENT

                       Module / Unit                                        Page

MODULE 1 HISTORY / EVOLUTION AND THE NATURE OF BANKING
BUSINESS IN NIGERIA

 Unit 1 The Pre-Banking Business Era in Nigeria                             14

 Unit 1 History / Evolution and the Nature of Banking Business in Nigeria   17

MODULE 2 THE CONCEPT OF A BANK, BANKER, AND BANKING BUSINESS

 Unit 1 The Concept of `Bank,' `Banker' and `Banking Business' in Nigeria   20

 Unit 2 Concept of the word "Customer" and the Features / Nature of Banker

Customer Relationship                                                       28

 Unit 3 Rights and Obligations in a banker-customer relationship            35

MODULE 3 NATURE, TYPES, FUNCTINS AND STRUCTURE OF THE
BANKING SYSTEM IN NIGERIA

 Unit 1 Types, Functions and Structure of Banking in Nigeria                42

 Unit 2 Other Specialised Banks in Nigeria                                  53

 Unit 3 Universal Banking System [UBS], 2000                                57

                                                                            13
MODULE 1 ­ THE HISTORY/EVOLUTION AND THE NATURE OF BANKING
BUSINESS IN NIGERIA

Unit 1: The Pre-Banking Business Era in Nigeria

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 The Pre-Banking Business Era in Nigeria

    1.3.1 Trade by Barter in Nigeria
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sources
1.6 Self-Assessment Exercises and Feedback

1.1 Introduction
    This module discusses the pre-banking era, before the concept of trade by barter, the advent of
    early / traditional money and the difficulties that followed before the banking business.

1.2 Learning Outcome
    At the end of this class, you should be able to know the pre-banking era in Nigeria as before
    1892, the concept of trade by barter, its challenges and their relationship to the banking
    business in Nigeria.

1.3 The Pre-Banking Business Era in Nigeria
    The pre-banking era is a phase in history of Nigerian banking business that cannot be treated
    with a hand wave because of the intrigues in trade by barter before the advent of money and
    subsequently, the era of banking business. This is so because the sole medium of exchange
    before the advent of money was `Trade by Barter' whereas, the advent of money triggered
    banking business in Nigeria.

         1.3.1 Concept of Trade by Barter
                Trade by Barter is the exchange of goods for goods and services for services. This
                was the sole medium of exchange before the advent of money in the olden days.
                Trade by barter was very cumbersome because of the difficulties encountered in the
                exchange of goods for goods and services for services by the fact that:

                                                                                                                             14
        (a) It was difficult to meet a person who needed some particular goods for
            another's goods or services and vis-a-vis.

        (b) The smarter trader outwitted other traders in terms of exchange. For
            instance, is where a smart buyer convinced a seller to exchange a cow for
            just two goats.

        (c) Moving around by a sellers to get buyers was also cumbersome
        (d) Losses were incurred over perishable goods, especially where a buyer could

            quickly not be reached etc.
  Following the difficulties stated above, it is clear that `Trade by Barter' had its
  demerits which obviously triggered the need for a medium of exchange (Money).
  This subsequently led to the advent of early / traditional monies like; cowries,
  elephant tusks, feathers of very important birds (peacocks & parrots), coral beads,
  seashells, mirror, spirits etc. This early / traditional money also had its difficulties as
  it lacked the features of contemporary money which include:

        (a) Not being scarce
        (b) Not durable
        (c) Not divisible
        (d) Not portable
        (e) Not generally accepted etc.

  Buying and selling through trade by barter had its difficulties. This triggered the need
  for early / traditional monies as the medium of exchange but that too, had its
  difficulties which also led to the switch to contemporary monies that include paper
  and coin monies that are in use today. In Nigeria for instance, Naira and kobo and
  other bills of exchange (cheques, postal orders, promissory notes etc), now serve as
  medium of exchange and consequently, the desire for banking business.

                            SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1
(a) Is money a necessity in buying and selling?
(b) What was the medium of exchange before the advent of money?
(c) The need for money as a medium of exchange was by necessity. Briefly discuss
(d) Does the advent of contemporary money actually solve the difficulties

    encountered in the use of early / traditional money?

                                                                                                              15
1.4 Summary
    The pre-banking era was earlier than 1882 and that, trade by barter was the initial medium of
    exchange. However, the difficulties led to the invention of early / traditional money which
    lacked the features of modern money that include not being scare, not legal tender, not durable,
    not portable, not from valuable ornaments etc.

1.5 Learning Outcome
      1) Ekemini Udim, Principles of Garnishee Proceedings in Nigeria, Princeton & Associate
          Ltd. Lagos.
      2) Emeka Chianu, Law of Banking. Texts: Cases; Comments, New System Press Ltd.
          1995
      3) Goldface ­ Irokalibe I . J., Law of Banking in Nigeria. Malthouse Law Book 2013.
      4) Holden J.M; "History of Negotiable Instruments in English Law"[1st Ed.], Althone,
          London. 1955
      5) Igweke K.I; "Law of Banking and Negotiable Instruments" African Publisher Ltd.
          Rev. Ed. 2008
      6) Olusegun Yerokun, casebook on Law of Banking (comments & cases) Nigeria
          Revenue Project Publications, 2015.
      7) Omotayo G; "A Dictionary of Finance" West Bourme, England: West Bourme
          Business School, 2007

1.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 1

                                                                                                                             16
                                          a. Yes, it is because, it eases the difficulties of trade by barter
b. Trade by barter was the medium of exchange by the exchange of goods for goods and services

                                                                                                   for services.
 c. The need for money as a medium of exchange was necessitated by the difficulties of trade by

                                                                                   barter which include that:
      i. It was difficult to meet a person who needed goods for services and not the other way round.
   ii. The smarter trader outwitted the slow trader in terms of exchange. For instance, where a buyer
                                               convinces and exchanges a cow for two goats with a seller.

                                             iii. Movement around by sellers to get buyers was cumbersome.
  iv. Losses were incurred where a buyer could not be quickly reached especially if perishable goods

                                                                                                were involved etc.
     d. Yes, it did ameliorate all difficulties encountered from the use of early / traditional money

                                                                            despite its own difficulties too.
MODULE 1 ­ THE HISTORY/EVOLUTION AND THE NATURE OF BANKING
BUSINESS IN NIGERIA

Unit 2: History/Evolution and the Nature of Banking Business in Nigeria

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 History/Evolution of Banking Business in Nigeria
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction
     The first foreign and indigenous banks before the proliferation of other banking businesses in
     Nigeria. State the reason for increased commercial banking business in Nigeria soon after
     1945; mention five reasons why the commercial banks that emerged thereafter in Nigeria still
     swindled their customers and investors etc.

2.2 Learning Outcome
       At the end of this class, you should be able to precisely discuss / state the history /
       evolution of Banking business in Nigeria, when, how and where banking business started
       in Nigeria.

2.3 History / Evolution of Banking Business
       Banking business started in the year 1892 in Nigeria because earlier than 1892, banking
       business was alien to Nigeria until the African Banking Corporation of South Africa
       established a branch in Lagos and later reorganized as the Bank of British West African
       [BBWA], having been acquired in 1893 by Elder Dempster and later renamed the Bank of
       West Africa [BWA]. However, [BWA] was later merged with the Chase Manhattan Bank in
       1894 and renamed the Standard Bank of Nigeria which is today known as the First Bank of
       Nigeria. In the year 1912, Nigeria's Colonial master, Britain, established the West African
       Currency Bank (WACB) in Nigeria and her other West Africa colonies just to meet her
       increased commercial and economic needs. The bank did not only have its headquarters in
                                                                                                                             17
Britain but had Whites only as Board members, used the British Pound Sterling currency
which was printed and minted in Britain. However, by 1917 Barclays Bank was established
in Lagos but later transformed into the current Union Bank of Nigeria. Whereas, other banks
that emerged include:

       The Industrial and Commercial Bank of Nigeria, 1929;
       The Nigerian Mercantile Bank, 1931;
       The National Bank of Nigeria, 1933
       Agbonmagbe Bank in 1945.

However, after the Second World War in 1945, there was increased Post war economic
activities which led to the emergence of more Commercial banks in Nigeria and a few
amongst which include:

       The African Continental Bank, 1947
       The Nigerian Trust Bank, 1951
       Mainland Bank, 1952

In 1954, there was regional autonomy which led to States being involved in banking business
and this made the federating States to individually own or jointly operate with foreign
partners in banking business in Nigeria. This development in the banking sector had
problems of dishonesty, inefficiency, inadequate paid capital, keen competition from
foreigners and the lack of banking business regulations etc. This also made customers and
investors lose confidence in the banking sector in Nigeria. This obviously triggered the need
for regulatory measures. The first being the Bills of Exchange Decree of 1917 before the
Banking Ordinance of 1952 which was later repealed as Banking Ordinance [CAP. 19] of
1958 and then, the Central Bank Act of 1959, the Nigerian Industrial Development Bank
[NIDB] of 1959 that was meant to issue the first public and Federal Government loans,
shares and stocks.

Thereafter, emerged the Treasury Bill Ordinance No. 11 of 1959 which was repealed to the
Treasury Bill of 1960 by Barbeck Committee Report of 1960, the Banking Amendment Act
[CAP 19] of 1962 etc. Swindling however continued due to the lacunae in these statutes but
later strengthened by the Central Bank [CBN] Act of 1959 which for instance, empowered
the CBN to control Nigeria's monetary policy. However, in the 60s, more banks sprang up
especially by the promulgation of the Company Decree No. 51 of 1968 which made it

                                                                                                                     18
       mandatory for companies and banks to be registered and incorporated but doubled in the 70s
       through the 80s and 90s, following the oil boom such that, the number of banks in Nigeria
       rose to at least, 126. The Banks and Other Financial Institutions Decree [BOFID] of 1991
       emerged amongst others; to provide safety to depositors, limit bank risks, preserve bank
       liquidity, ensure solvency, build customers and investors' confidence, ensure effective State
       control of banking activities etc.

       By 1995, the Nigerian Investment Promotions Commission Decree No. 3 of 1997; No. 37 of
       1998 and No. 41 of 1999 had been promulgated and quickly followed by the Universal
       Banking System (UBS) of year 2000 that was meant to regulate all purposes of banking
       business and to offer a wide range of banking services like under writing of debts and
       equities, trading in financial instruments, wholesale and retail banking activities on shares,
       bonds, debentures etc. It is clear that banking business was introduced in Nigeria by South
       Africa but later consolidated and owned mainly by the British before partnerships and the
       total indigenization of banking business in Nigeria.1 The increased British post war
       economic activities triggered the proliferation of commercial banks in Nigeria especially for
       their economic benefits and worse still, it was not regulated. However, the promulgation of
       statutes helped to minimize the swindling of customers and investors even though a lot is
       still desired in the area of regulations.

                                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCOSE 2

          a) State the year banking business was introduced into Nigeria
          b) Clearly affirm those who introduced the African Banking Corporation in Nigeria
          c) Name the first bank in Nigeria
          d) Name the first indigenous bank in Nigeria
          e) State the first type of currency in use before the Naira and Kobo and the reason why
          f) State the reason for increased commercial banking business in Nigeria soon after 1945
          g) Mention at least two commercial banks that emerged thereafter in Nigeria
          h) Mention what increased the proliferation of banking business in Nigeria after 1945
          i) State why despite the increased number of banking business, customers and investors

               were being swindled
          j) What did the Central Bank of Nigeria Act cure in the banking business sector?

1 Igweike K.I; "Law of Banking and Negotiable Instruments" African Publishers Ltd. Rev. Ed. 2008, p. 1
                                                                                                                             19
2.4 Summary
      Banking business in Nigeria, started in 1892, that the South African Banking Corporation
      was the first bank established in Nigeria and situate in Lagos before its takeover by Elder
      Dempster. The proliferation of banking business after 1945 was triggered by the increased
      British Post World War II economic activities and the desire to meet their economic needs.
      It is also clear that the emergence of banking regulations was to forestall swindling of bank
      customers and investors. It is true that the Bank of West Africa [BWA] was later merged
      with Chase Manhattan Bank in 1894 and renamed the Standard Bank of Nigeria which is
      today known as the First Bank of Nigeria. You also now know that the first banking
      regulation is the Bills of Exchange Decree of 1917 before the Banking Ordinance of 1952
      which was later repealed as the Banking Ordinance [CAP. 19] of 1958. Whereas the Central
      Bank Act of 1959 helped to control Nigeria's monetary policy.

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
       1) Igweike K.I; "Law of Banking and Negotiable Instruments" African Publishers Ltd.
           Rev. Ed. 2008

2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 2

                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                              a) 1893
  b) South Africa first introduced banking activities in Nigeria by her establishment a branch of the

    African Banking Corporation in Lagos which name evolved to become First Bank of Nigeria
                                               c) First Bank of Nigeria (Former Standard Bank of Nigeria)
                                                                 d) National Bank of Nigeria founded in 1933
      e) British Pound Sterling because the British was Nigeria's Colonial master, the currency was

               printed and minted in Britain and had only Whites as its Board members in Britain.
 f) The reason for increased commercial banking business in Nigeria soon after 1945 was the Post

                                                    Second World War and increase economic activities.
g) 1945 marked the end of the 2nd World War when the British increased the economic activities in

                                              Nigeria and so, desired more secured economic activities.
  h) The Industrial and Commercial Bank of Nigeria, 1929 & The Nigerian Mercantile Bank, 1931
     i) There were no banking business regulations then until the Banking Ord. of 1952 and others.
                                                               j) It helped control Nigeria's monetary policy.
MODULE 2 THE CONCEPT OF A BANK, BAN KER AND BANKING BUSINESS

Unit 1: The Concept of `Bank,' `Banker' and `Banking Business' in Nigeria

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 The Concept of `Bank,' `Banker' and `Banking Business' in Nigeria

      1.3.1 Statutory Concepts of the words; Bank, Banker, and Banking Business
      1.3.2 Conflicts in Concepts of the words; Bank, Banker & Banking Business
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
1.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 3

1.1 Introduction
      This module concerns the presumed concepts of the words; `Bank', `Banker' and `Banking
      Business' as shortly deduced not from the statutes but judicial pronouncements as will be seen
      in the main content of this class study. This class will also discuss what banking business
      without due license, could infer from the statutes but not facts, the class will also discuss the
      obvious conflicts in the different concepts for the words; `bank', `bankers' and `banking
      business' in Nigeria.

1.2 Learning Outcome
      At the end of this class, you should be able to define the words bank, banker and banking
      business even though limited by statute but not by facts (judicial precedence) and discern the
      conflicts in the concepts.

1.3 The Concept of `Bank,' `Banker' and `Banking Business' in Nigeria
      1.3.1 Statutory Concepts of the words; Bank, Banker, and Banking Business
               The words bank, banker and banking business are statutorily defined thus:
                 1) S. 2 (1) of the Evidence Act, 2011 says `Bank' and `Banker' mean; "Any
                      person, persons, partnership or company carrying on the business of bankers that
                      includes any Savings bank established under the Federal Savings Bank Act, 1990
                                                                                                                              21
                     and any banking company incorporated under any Charter hereafter granted, or
                     under any Act hereafter passed relating to such incorporation."

                2) Section 2 2(1) of Bill of Exchange Act did not specifically define a `Bank' but
                     says a Banker includes A body of persons whether incorporated or not who
                     carry on the business of banking."

                3) The Banking Act (CAP 19) of 1962 says; "A Bank is any person who carries
                     on Banking business" and Section 3 (1) of the same Act as repealed says; "No
                     banking business shall be transacted in Nigeria EXCEPT by a company which
                     is in possession of a valid license which shall be granted by the Minister after
                     consultation with the Central bank, authorizing it to carry on banking business
                     in Nigeria."

                4) Whereas, Section 61 of Banks and Other Financial Institutions Decree
                     (BOFID), 1991 now Section 66 of the Banks and other Financial Intuition
                     Act3, says; "Bank" means; "A Bank licensed under this Decree" and also says
                     Banking Business4 is; "The business of receiving money on current account
                     from the general public, of paying and collecting cheques drawn by / paid in by
                     customers and making advances to customers."

                5) Section 2 (1) of Banking Decree, 1969 provides; "No person shall carry on any
                     banking business in Nigeria EXCEPT a company duly incorporated in Nigeria
                     and holds a valid banking license issued under this Decree."

     1.3.2 Conflicts in Concepts of the words; Bank, Banker & Banking Business
              It is clear that there is a conflict / ambiguity/ interception in the concepts of a "Bank";
              "Banker" and "Banking business" as all words seem synonymous and interchangeably
              used and but clearly specific in the ordinary usage by Court pronouncements in the

2 Section 2 Cap.B8 LFN.2004.
3 Cap B.3 LFN 2004
44 Section 66 BOFIA

                                                                                                                             22
              cases of Akwule & 10 Ors v. the Queen5 and Copland V. Davies6 if contrasted with
              the provisions of S. 2 (1) of the Bills of Exchange Act, 1990 which says: "Banker"
              includes a body of persons whether incorporated or not who carry on the business of
              banking." However, the purpose of statutory regulations for the banking business is to
              forestall fraud by regulating banking activities in Nigeria and not to foreclose people
              from daily savings business meant to keep body and soul as expressed by the Court in
              the case of AG FED v. EKPA7 who operates daily collection outfit called `Global
              Savings Syndicate' that collects money daily from market women and other members
              of the public which he saved in the Mercantile Bank of Nigeria Ltd, Calabar in trust
              for his customers and to be paid an agreed amount as commission for his services on
              the return of the savings.

              Ekpa advertised his business through handbills, radio announcements but was charged
              to court for operating a banking business without a valid license and claimed to have
              contravened Section 41 of the Banking Decree of 1969 which provides that;
              "Banking business is receiving monies from outside sources as deposits irrespective
              of the payment of interest or purchase of bills, cheques or sales of securities on account
              of others or incurring of the obligation to acquire claims in respect of loans prior to
              their maturity or the assumption of guaranties and other warranties for others or
              effecting transfers and clearing of such other transactions as the Commissioner may
              on the recommendation of the Central Bank and by order, published in the Federal
              Gazette designate as banking business". The provisions of Section 61 of BOFID,
              1991 explains that - A bank must be incorporated (registered) and licensed to carry on
              banking business especially if the different concepts and Court decisions are critically
              examined as in the cases of Akwule & 10 Ors V. The Queen8 and Attorney General
              of the Federation V. Ekpa9.

5 Sections 2 (1) of the Evidence Act, 2011; b Section 2 (1) of Bills of Exchange Act of 2004; Section 61 of Banks and
  Other Financial Institutions Act 2004 ; Banking Act (Cap 19) of 1962 and Section 2 (1) of Banking Decree of 1969

6 1871 ­ 72, H.L. 358
7 FRC/PH/25c/75 of 1976
8 (1962) FSC. 325
9 FHC/PH/25/75

                                                                                                                             23
              A bank worker, however, becomes a banker in the (ordinary sense) but not the
              statutory sense as decided in the case of COPLAND v. DAVIES10 where the
              employee breaches the trust of the customers by defrauding them of monies entrusted
              to the bank in the course of carrying on banking business on behalf of his employer
              (Bank). Hence, Lord Hatherley L. C; said: "It is not disputed that a bank staff was a
              banker in the ordinary literal sense of the word simply by receiving peoples' money
              and giving them receipts not as for transfers of property or for anything of that kind
              but for receipts of money, acknowledging the receipt of money and issuing of pass-
              books, cheque books and dealing with them in the ordinary way of a banker. We would
              add that even if an employee of a bank could for any purpose be regarded as a banker
              within the meaning of section 2 (1) of the Bills of Exchange Act11, it was meant to be
              used in the ordinary sense because a breach of trust was committed in relation to
              monies which were already the property of the bank i.e. monies entrusted to the bank
              employee in the ordinary sense and not in any other capacity" that involves:

                  1) The acceptance of deposits from customers
                  2) The provision of loans
                  3) Payment of cheques collected or drawn or paid in by customers.

              The question now is ­ does it mean that ­ once money is lodged with another, the
              person who accepts the lodged money will be deemed to be operating banking
              business? Is there any exception to the concept of banking business in Section 61 of
              BOFIA, 1991 that connotes corporate bodies must be registered and licensed as
              compared to the case of A.G Federation v. Ekpa12 where Justice Akanbi reiterates
              that: "Global Savings Syndicate" is not a bank even though he made daily collections
              through his agents and employees from market women and a few other persons. The
              aim of the Banking Act and other regulations is to prevent the establishment of
              financial institutions like Commercial Banks, Acceptance Houses, Discount Houses
              and others at which normal banking business may be transacted from operating
              banking business without a valid license. It is not to prevent people from making little
              savings which it appears to me is the idea behind the establishment of the Global

10 (1871) HL.358
11 Cap B3 LFN. 2004
12 supra

                                                                                                                             24
              Savings Syndicate run by the accused person in the case of Ekpa." Compare and
              contrast Ekpa's case with the following statutory provisions below:

                1) Section 41 of the Banking Decree, 1969 provides that; "Banking Business is the
                     business of receiving monies from outside sources as deposits irrespective of the
                     payment of interest or the granting of loans and acceptance of credits or the
                     purchase of bills and cheques or sales of securities for account of others or the
                     incurring of the obligation to acquire claims in respect of loans prior to their
                     maturity or the assumption of guarantees and other warranties for other or the
                     effecting of transfers and clearing and such other transactions as the
                     Commissioner may, on the recommendation of the Central Bank, by order
                     published in the Federal Gazette designate as Banking Business."

                2) Section 2 (1) of the Evidence Act that says; "Bank and Banker means any person,
                     persons, partnership or company carrying on the business of bankers and
                     includes: any Savings Bank established under the Federal Savings Bank Act and
                     any banking company incorporated under any charter hereafter granted or under
                     any act hereafter passed relating to such incorporation."

                3) Section 66 of BOFIA13, which provides that; "Bank means a bank licensed under
                     this Decree." While Section 2 (1) of Banks and Other Financial Institutions
                     Decree [BOFID] 1991 now BOFIA says that; "No person shall carry on any
                     banking business in Nigeria except it is a company duly incorporated in Nigeria
                     and holds a valid banking license issued under this Decree" notwithstanding the
                     provisions of Section 2 (1) of the Bills of Exchange Act 1990 that provides;
                     "Banker includes a body of persons whether incorporated or not who carry on
                     the business of banking" as contemplated within the above provisions but
                     especially BOFIA, 1011. So, small saving schemes do not come within the
                     meaning or concept of a bank, banker and banking business even though the
                     scope of banking is often determined by the established fact of debtor / creditor
                     relationship which must be contractual in nature as decided in WOODS V.
                     MARTINS BANK LTD & ORS14 where Justice Salmon reiterates; "In my
                     judgment, the limits of a banker's business cannot be laid down as a matter of

13 Cap BB LFN.2004
14 [1959] 1 Q.B.55

                                                                                                                             25
                     law. The nature of such a business must in each case be matter of facts..." This
                     was however first decided in FOLEY v. HILL15 before EKPA's case.

                                           SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 3
                   1) Is there any clear concept for the words; `bank', `banker' and `banking

                       business'?
                   2) Is carrying out daily collection of money from members of the public for

                       saving like Ekpa, an act that constitutes banking business without due license.
                   3) Is a banker's business laid down as a matter of facts or limits of the law?

1.4 Summary
     There is no clear statutory concept of the words; `Bank', `Banker' and `Banking Business' but
     rather judicial pronouncements. You also now know that there are conflicts in the concepts of
     these words as inferred and interchangeably used in the statutes against the judicial
     pronouncements; that the purpose for statutory regulations in the banking business in Nigeria
     is to forestall fraud and not to foreclose people from the business of daily savings meant to
     keep body and soul as expressed in the case of A.G FED. V. EKPA16 which contrasts the
     provisions of Section 2 (1) of the Bills of Exchange Act 17that provides; "A Banker includes
     a body of persons whether incorporated or not who carry on the business of banking." You
     also find that, a bank worker (banker) can become a bank in the ordinary literary sense where
     the banker breaches the trust of the customers and investors by defrauding them of monies
     entrusted to the bank in the course of carrying on banking business on behalf of his employer
     (Bank) as decided in the case of COPLAND v. DAVIES18 and that ­ a bank must however
     be incorporated (registered) and licensed to carry on banking business especially if the
     different concepts and Court decisions are critically examined as in A.G Fed v. Ekpa (Supra)
     and Akwule & 10 Ors v. Queen.19

15 [1848] 2 HL, 28
16 FRC/ PH/25/C75/1976 at 206, 207
17 Cap B8 LFN. 2004
18 1871-74, 5. H.L.358 at 375
19 supra

                                                                                                                             26
                                                         1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Sourcesa) There is no clearly known concept of the words bank, banker and banking business except
                            1) Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act Cap B8 LFN 2004by judicial pronouncements where contrasted with the different conflicting statutory
    concepts of these words as provided by Section 41 of the Banking Decree, 1969; S. 2 (1) of
                                                             1.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 3the Evidence Act, Section 66 of Banks and Other Financial Institutions Decree (BOFIA), etc.

2 7b) The aim of banking regulations and other Acts is not to prevent people from making little
    savings which it appears to me is the idea behind the establishment of the Global Savings
    Syndicate run by the accused person in the case of Ekpa but to stop people from swindling.
    The aim of the Banking Act and other regulations is also to prevent the establishment of
    financial institutions like Commercial Banks, Acceptance Houses, Discount Houses and
    others at which normal banking business may be transacted from operating banking business
    without a valid license. It is not to prevent people from making little savings which it appears
    to me is the idea behind the establishment of the Global Savings Syndicate run by the accused
    person in the case of Ekpa.

c) It is clear that there is conflict / ambiguity/ interception in the concepts of a `Bank'; `Banker'
    and `Banking business' as all words seem synonymous and interchangeably used but clearly
    specific in the ordinary usage from Court pronouncements in the cases of AKWULE & 10
    ORS v. THE QUEEN1 and COPLAND v. DAVIES1 if contrasted with the provisions of
    S. 2 (1) of the Bills of Exchange Act, 2004 which says: "Banker" includes a body of persons
    whether incorporated or not who carry on the business of banking." However, where the
    word Banker is said to include a body of persons whether incorporated or not who carry on
    the business of banking as contemplated within the provisions BOFID, 1991, the nature of
    such a business must in each case be matter of facts..." This was however, first decided in
    FOLEY v. HILL1 before EKPA's case.
MODULE 2 THE CONCEPT OF A BANK, BAN KER AND BANKING BUSINESS

Unit 2: Concept of the word "Customer" and the Features / Nature of Banker Customer
Relationship

2.1.Introduction
2.2. Learning Outcomes
2.3. Main Contents

      2.3.1 Who is a `Customer'?
      2.3.2 The Nature of Banker Customer Relationship
      2.3.3 Features of a Contract
      2.3.4 Indemnity, Conditions and Warranties
2.4. Summary
2.5. References/Further Reading/Web Sources
2.6. Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises and Feedback

2.1 Introduction
     This unit explains who a bank customer is, what the features / natures of banker customer
     relationship are like. If contractual or otherwise and how the contract can be terminated
     especially where a condition becomes a fundamental term for an offeror to revoke a contract.
     It will also discuss the duties and defences of a bank to a customer and vis-à-vis.

2.2 Learning Outcome
     At the end of this unit, you should know who a bank customer is, banker customer relationship
     and the nature of banker customer relationship.

2.3 Concept of the word "Customer" and the Features / Nature of Banker Customer
     Relationship
     2.3.1 Who is a customer?
              There is no known statutory concept of who a customer is except by judicial
              pronouncements on (Advise; contractual relationship or irrespective of having opened

                                                                                                                             28
              an account; account duration not of essence & if the customer intends to or has opened
              an account). Hence by decided cases, a customer is the following:

              A person the bank agrees to advice as decided in WOODS v. DAVIES BANK LTD20
              from the moment the bank agrees to advise a person even though the person had not
              opened an account with such a bank. Hence, in this case where the Plaintiff had no
              business experience but went to the defendant bank for advice on how and where to
              invest his money and the branch Manager advised him to invest in a private company
              that banked with his branch where the customer lost his money through negligence of
              the bank that allowed the defendant to over withdraw till it became bankrupt and
              consequently, defrauded the customer.

              A person who has a contractual relationship with the bank as decided in New Nigeria
              Bank Ltd v. Odiase21 where the Court held that Odiase was a customer irrespective
              of having opened an account with the bank or not so long as a contractual relationship
              has been established. Odiase [the respondent] was a Mining Engineering student being
              sponsored in Turkey by his anty one Mrs. Obasuyi who through the Appellant bank
              applied to the Central Bank for foreign exchange to pay the respondent's school fees
              but the Appellant bank diverted the use of the money for a stranger. Odiase was
              regarded "A Customer" irrespective of his having an account with the bank or not.

              A person who has an account with the bank irrespective of the duration as in the case
              of Commissioner for Taxation v. English Scottish & Australian Bank22 where
              Lord Duredin reiterates: "A customer signifies someone who has an account with the
              bank but the relationship is not one of which duration is of essence."
              A person who has or intends to open an account with a bank even though he has not
              done so. See the case of Great Western Railway Corporation v. London & County
              Banking Corporation Ltd.23 where an action to recover monies withdrawn by
              Huggins through a fraudulently acquired cheque failed even though Huggins was
              convicted but the issue inter-alia is - whether Huggins was a customer? The court held

20 supra
21 [1993] 8 N.W.L.R. Pt. 310, 235
22 [1920] A.C. 683, 687
23 [1901] A.C, 414, 420-421

                                                                                                                             29
              that Huggins was not a customer, but the position today is that: "A person is a customer
              to a bank immediately he opens or intends to open an account" irrespective of duration
              as was held in Commissioner for Taxation v. English Scottish & Australian Bank
              (supra).24

     2.3.2 The Nature of Banker-Customer Relationship
              Banker customer relationship is basically that of a debtor and creditor but must be
              contractual either by implication or as expressly stated by the parties. It was first
              decided as a debtor and creditor relationship in FOLEY v. HILL.25 Also see the case
              of YUSUF v. COOPERATIVE BANK LTD26 where the court held that: "The
              relationship between a banker and its customer is that of a debtor and creditor the very
              moment the banker agrees to accept a person as its customer".

              The nature of banker customer relationship is actually that of a simple contract, not
              put in a single, comprehensive and formal document but a partly written and implied
              agreement (contract) from trade practices and judicial decisions earlier shown above.
              However, a bank is under obligation to pay its customer the amount standing to his
              credit in his current account and savings accounts when the customer makes a demand
              for payment and the banker fails to meet the demand where the customer is in credit.
              This act calls for action to recover the amount demanded for, from the date of the
              failure, to date of effective payment. Whereas the account of the customer may at times
              not be in credit and he obtains an overdraft or loan from his bankers and so, becomes
              the debtor while the banker becomes the creditor as decided in the cases of Ya' u v.
              Bank Of The North Ltd,27 Midland Bank v. Conway Corporation28 & Ashubiojo
              v. A.C.B.29

24 [1920] A.C. 683, 687
25 [1848] 2 H.O.L. 28
26 (1991) SC. 144
27 [1994] 1 NWLR Pt. 321 at 461, 470 G-H
28 [1965] 1 W.L.R 1165
29 [1966] 2 ALL N.L.R. at 203

                                                                                                                             30
     2.3.3 Features of a Contract
              The features of a contract include offer, acceptance and consideration as discussed
              below:
               1) Offer
                   This is an expression of willingness to contract made with the intention that it
                   shall become binding as soon as the person to whom the offer was addressed,
                   accepts it, as stated in the case of AGOMA v. GUINNESS NIGERIA LTD.30
                   Generally, an offer is deemed to have taken effect from the time it is
                   communicated to the offeree and where an offer is made through the post, it is
                   deemed to have been made at the time and place it was posted. But can be
                   terminated by (revocation, rejection, death, failure to meet condition precedent &
                   the lapse of time) as followings:
                    (a) Revocation occurs where an offeror revokes his offer which can however not
                         be operational if by post, as decided in BYME v. TEIN HOVEN31
                    (b) Rejection by who the offer is made to which automatically terminates the
                         contract as in U.B.A LTD v. TEJUMOLA & SONS LTD.32
                    (c) Death of a party especially the offeror, invalidates a contract except where
                         the personal representative answers to the obligation that the offer remains
                         valid and enforceable as decided in KENNEDY v. THOMASSEN.33
                    (d) Failure to meet condition precedent (conditions subject to which an offer
                         is made) and for instance, where an offeror insures a government property
                         without government approval, terminates the offer as decided in Irukwu &
                         Ors v. Trinity Mills Insurance Brokers.34
                    (e) Lapse of time invalidates contracts because time is of essence in any contract
                         as in the case of NGILLARI v. NATIONAL INSURANCE COMPANY
                         OF NIGERIA [N.I.C.O.N]35

30 [1995] 2 N.W.L.R. Pt. 380, 672, 690 at Para G.
31 [1880] 5 C.P.D. 344; 42 L.T. 371.
32 [1988] 2 N.W.L.R. Pt 79 at 662
33 [1929] 1 CH. 426
3434 [1997] 12 N.W.L.R. Pt. 531 at 113, 129, Para. F at P. 135 at Para. G-H
35 [1998] 8 N.W.L.R. Pt. 560, 1. Of 14 at Para. G

                                                                                                                             31
               2) Acceptance
                   This is a final and unqualified expression of assent to the terms of an offer or
                   contract which must be absolute BUT MAY BE oral, written or by conduct e.g
                   part performance of an offeror's condition like the part payment of a total rent to
                   a landlord or caretaker of a property. See NGILLARI v. NATIONAL
                   INSURANCE COMPANY OF NIGERIA [NICON]36. However, acceptance
                   can be invalid by (*conditionality, *if by a stranger, *if a counteroffer & *cross
                   offer) and discussed as followings:
                    (a) Acceptance is conditional i.e made subject to condition precedent
                         (occurrence of an event) as in the cases of UBA v. TEJUMOLA & SONS
                         LTD37 where the Court decided that; "subject to Contract" was regarded as
                         still in the negotiation stage and so, provisional and invalid.
                    (b) If acceptance is by a stranger and for instance, where a non-offeree is not
                         entitled to accept an offer, the acceptance becomes invalid as decided in
                         BOULTON v. JONES.38
                    (c) If acceptance is a Counteroffer (not whole) but partial i.e subject to
                         conditions as in NGILLARI V. N.I.C.O.N39
                    (d) If acceptance is a Cross offer connotes two offers of similar terms or
                         conditions by two offerors that cross in transit EXCEPT there is a consensus
                         ad idem to make the acceptance of one out of the two offers accepted before
                         the offeree, the acceptance becomes invalid as decided in TINN v.
                         HOFMAN & CO40

               3) Consideration is some right, interest, profit or benefit accruing to one party or
                   some forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility given, suffered or undertaken
                   by the other. For instance, a promise to indemnify risks against loses that may
                   arise there from a transaction.

36 supra
37 supra
38 [1957] 2 H. & N 564
3939 supra
40 [1873] 29 L.T.271

                                                                                                                             32
     2.3.4 Indemnity, Conditions and Warranties
               1) Under Common law, no law invalidates indemnity even where the promise has
                   not been fulfilled or is partly fulfilled except where so expressly stated as in the
                   decided case of NGILLARI and IRUKWU41.

               2) For Statutory intervention, condition precedent settles the ambiguity for
                   consideration in a valid contract either in part or fully, by the provisions of S. 50
                   of the Insurance Act42 which says: "The receipt of an insurance premium shall
                   be condition precedent to consideration in a valid contract and there shall be no
                   cover in respect of the risk, unless the premium is paid in advance"

                   Generally, the terms of a contract may be with a condition, warranty or a
                   fundamental term (utmost good) which entitles an offeror to avoid or revoke a
                   contract whenever there is a breach of the terms to enable the offeror claim for
                   damages insofar as the subject is legal and has insurable interest as decided in the
                   case of CARLILL v. CABOLIC SMOKE BALL CO.43 However, it is trite law
                   that parties to a contract must have capacity to contract and the full intention to
                   create a legal relationship between them as it was in the case of NWANGWU v.
                   NZEKWU & ORS44

                                               SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 4

                           (a) Who is a Bank Customer?
                           (b) What are the features of the contractual relationship between a banker

                                and customer?
                           (c) What is the effect of warranty or condition precedent on a valid

                                contract?

2.4 Summary
     A bank customer is determined not only by contractual relationship but that of a debtor
     creditor or by the bank merely advising the customer or the customer merely intends or has

41 Supra
42 Cap. 117 LFN. 2004
43 [1893] 1 Q.B. 256
44 Supra

                                                                                                                             33
     even opened an account irrespective of the time duration. You should also now know that
     once there is offer, acceptance and consideration from both the banker and customer, a
     contract is already established as these are same features of a regular legal contract. Generally,
     you should also now know that the terms of a contract may be with a condition, warranty or
     a fundamental term (utmost good) which entitles an offeror to avoid or revoke a contract
     whenever there is a breach of the terms. This is to enable the offeror claim for damages insofar
     as the subject is legal and has insurable interest as decided in the case of CARLILL v.
     CABOLIC SMOKE BALL CO.45 However, you also now know that statutory intervention
     or condition precedent settles the ambiguity for consideration in a valid contract either in part
     or fully as provided by S. 50 of the Insurance Act which says: "The receipt of premium shall
     be condition precedent to consideration in a valid contract and there shall be no cover in
     respect of the risk, unless the premium is paid in advance." Hence, it is trite law that parties
     to a contract must have capacity to contract and the full intention to create a legal relationship
     between them as it was stated in the case of NWANGWU v. NZEKWU & ORS46
2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources

         1) Goldface-Irokalibe, I.J. Law of Banking in Nigeria
2.6 Self-Assessment Exercises and Feedback

45 Supra
46 Supra

                                                                                                                             34
(a) A Bank Customer is anyone who has not only a contractual relationship with a bank but he
becomes a customer the instance he is being advised by the bank, he merely intends or has even
                                                                                         opened a account etc.

(b) The features of a valid legal contract include offer, acceptance and consideration which subsist
                                                                          in a banker customer relationship

(c) The effects of warranty or condition precedent hence, the acceptance of premium shall be
condition precedent to consideration in a valid contract and there shall be no cover in respect of
the risk, unless the premium is paid fully in advance. By this, it is trite law that parties to a
contract must have capacity to contract and the full intention to create a legal relationship
                     between them as it were in the case of NWANGWU v. NZEKWU & ORS1.
MODULE 2 THE CONCEPT OF A BANK, BAN KER AND BANKING BUSINESS

Unit 3: Rights and Obligations in a banker-customer relationship

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Rights and Obligations in a Banker-Customer Relationship

      3.3.1 Duties of a customer
      3.3.2 Banker's rights and defences
      3.3.3 Duties of a customer to the banker
      3.3.4 Rights and defences of a customer
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 4

3.1 Introduction
     This module discusses the duties of a banker to a customer and the rights / defences that avail
     the banker in the course of carrying out his duties to a customer, the circumstances where a
     banker may be sued and the defences may not avail him, the nature of the damages to claim
     against the banker and instances where the basic duties of a banker to a customer may be
     violated and yet not an offence. Also, are monies paid by mistake into a customer's account
     or client's money.

3.2 Learning Outcome
     At the end of this unit, you should be able to
        (a) explain what the duties of a banker to a customer are and the banker's rights / defences
            against the customer and vis-à-vis.
        (b) know when and under what circumstances the basic duties of a banker to a customer can
            be violated and the banker will not be in the offensive, and the nominal, substantial or
            special damages that may be claimed by customer against a banker.

3.3 Rights and Obligations in a Banker-Customer Relationship
     3.3.1 Duties of a banker to a customer
              The duties of a banker to a customer include the followings:
                                                                                                                             35
               1) Duty to honor bank customer's cheques:
                   It is the duty of the bank to repay fully the monies deposited by a customer upon
                   demand but where the customer fails to do this, the bank may not be liable as
                   decided in JOACHIMSON v. SWISS BANK CORPORATION47 where Lord
                   Atkin reiterates that: "...it is necessarily a term of such contract that a banker is
                   not liable to pay the customer the full amount of his balance, until he demands
                   payment from the bank at the branch which the current account is kept" However,
                   a bank customer whose account is in credit and his cheque is dishonored, can sue
                   the banker (bank) for damages / breach of contract and not the endorsee (staff).
                   The damages can be nominal, substantial or special like libel which needs proof
                   as decided in OKAFOR v. UNION BANK OF NIGERIA48 aside the claim for
                   repayment.

             2) Duty to keep customer's account secret except:
                  (a) Where there is the duty to disclose to the public such secret/confidential
                       information/record.
                  (b) Where disclosure is made express or implied by customers consent
                  (c) Where disclosure is for the benefit of the bank
                  (d) Where disclosure is by compulsion e.g by supoena from a court which must be
                       served on the banker before anyone may be allowed to inspect banker's ledger.
                       See Tournier v. National Provincial & Union Bank of England Ltd.49

             3) Duty to keep customer's account secret.

             4) Duty to notify customer of its intention to close customer's account.

             5) Duty to present to customers' Bills for acceptance and payment as decided in
                 African Continental Bank Ltd v. Yusuf50

47 [1921] 3 K.B. 110
48 [1981] 1-3 CCHCJ [1983] LIBEL
49 [1924] 1 K.B. 461 section 24 of the EFCC Act empower EFCC to freeze account of customer of a Bank
50 [1978] 2 S.C. 93, 101

                                                                                                                             36
             6) Duty to notify customer of the dishonor of his bill as in the case of African
                 Continental Bank Ltd v. Yusuf.51

             7) Duty to indemnify customer for unauthorized withdrawal from his account as
                 decided in the case of Nigerian Advertising Service Ltd v. United Bank for
                 Africa Ltd.52

     3.3.2 Banker's Rights / Defences:
              The followings rights / defences avail a banker against wrongful dishonor of
              customer's cheque:
               1) Rights to charge interest on loans or overdrafts and others. Interest is; "A
                   compensation paid by the borrower to the lender for deprivation of the use of his
                   money" while overdraft is; "Monies drawn by a bank's customer in advance of
                   regularly expected payment into a given account usually a salary account" Note
                   that - banks are not charitable organizations and so, must collect interest from
                   customers for all monies borrowed or taken in advance. The case of Aforka v.
                   African Continental Bank Ltd53 on the collection of interest is relevant. Also is
                   the case of Yourell v. Hibernian Bank54 is relevant for implied agreement to
                   charge interest on loans. The case of Bower v. Turner55 for interest on overdrafts
                   as well as the universal grounds of banking customs and practices in regard to
                   compound interest on yearly or half yearly basis. However, where interest is fixed,
                   it cannot then be unilaterally altered by the banker alone as decided in Union
                   Bank of Nigeria v. Prof. Albert O. Ozigi56 but where the borrower does not
                   protest on the receipt of a statement of account showing the fixed rate by the bank
                   it is deemed to be an acceptance. This was the decision in the case of Barclays
                   Bank D.C.O. v. Hassan57 or where a customer overdraws his account.

51 Supra
52 [1965] CCHCCJ 84.
53 [1994] 3 NWLR Pt. 331, 217
54 [1918] A.C. 372
55 [1863] 32 L.J Ch. 540, 544
56 [1991] 2 NWLR Pt. 176, 677
57 [1961] ALL N. L. R. 836, 839

                                                                                                                             37
               2) A banker has a right where a customer has overdrawn his account especially where
                   there are no sufficient funds to meet his request or withdrawal except if it is an
                   overdraft as decided in the case of Cuthbert v. Roberts Lubback & Co.58

               3) Banker's right of lien over customers' properties/securities in their possession
                   where customers fail to fulfill their obligations of indebtedness to the bank as
                   decided in the cases of Alabi v. Standard Bank of Nigeria Ltd.59 and the British
                   & French Bank V. Owodunmi.60 However, this right does not apply to monies
                   paid into customer's account under a mistake of facts as in the case of monies paid
                   in to set-off the liability of a customer to a corporate body as decided in the case
                   of Ogundeji v. International Bank of West Africa & Ors.61

               4) Money mistakenly paid into wrong account as decided in Standard Bank of
                   Nigeria Ltd v. A.G Federation.62

               5) Restraint by Court to freeze or suspend an account in the interest of peace
                   especially if a Court order has been served to that effect. See International Bank
                   for West Africa v. Kennedy Transport Nigeria Ltd.63

               6) Compliance with Presidential directive to freeze an account. Failure to comply
                   will amount to a criminal offence as well as no action can succeed in this regards
                   against such a bank Manager. See Effiwatt v. Barclays Bank D.C.O. Nigeria
                   Ltd & Ors64

               7) Defence in denial of some facts relating to drawings, endorsing, accepting,
                   presenting notice of dishonor or taking noting as the case may be. See Comptoir
                   Commercial Industrial (Afrique) Nigeria Ltd v. Akinkugbe & Ors.65

58 [1909] 2 Ch. 226
59 [1974] 4 ECSLR; 574, 575
60 [1956] 1 F.S.C. 4, 5-6
61 [1993] 2 NWLR Pt. 278, 690
62 [1971] ANLR 388
63 [1993] 7 NWLR Pt. 304, 238
64 [1970] ANLR 360
65 [1976] 6 U.I.L.R. Pt. III; 368

                                                                                                                             38
               8) Defence of insufficient funds can avail a banker against a customer whose account
                   is not in funds because he cannot maintain an action for breach of contract or
                   defamation. See Ademiluyi v. African Continental Bank Ltd.66

               9) Where there is inconsistency with a client's fiduciary obligation which arises
                   when a customer operates a Trust account that for instance, where withdrawals
                   that are inconsistent with the client's fiduciary obligation ought to be monitored
                   by the banker. See Fulani v. Bank Of British West Africa.67

               10) Receipt of the news of customer's death or his mental infirmity terminates banker-
                   customer relationship. i.e customer's account can be closed on this ground. This
                   is a notorious fact but depending on the available facts or circumstances.

     3.3.3 Duties of Customers to Bankers:
               1) Duty not to facilitate fraud by taking reasonable care in drawing cheques or other
                   bank instruments as decided in Salawu v. Union Bank of Nigeria Ltd68.

               2) Duty to follow proper banking procedures like paying monies into an account
                   through the cashier being the proper channel as decided in Bisi Salawu v. Union
                   Bank of Nigeria Ltd69.

               3) Duty to disclose forgery to banker as decided in Nigerian Advertising Service
                   Ltd. v. United Bank For Africa Ltd70; Greenwood v. Martins Bank Ltd. 71
                   and Brown v. Westminister Bank Ltd72.

               4) Duty to pay or credit accounts properly as decided in Standard Bank Of Nigeria
                   Ltd v. A.G Leventis 7573.

66 [1964] N.C.L.R. 10
67 [1953] 14 WACA, 292
68 (1986) 4 NWLR 9PT. 38) 701.
69 Supra
70 (1965) LL.R. 84
71 (1932) K. B. 371
72 (1964) 2 LLOYDS 187.
73 (1964) ALL NLR. 388.

                                                                                                                             39
               5) Duty to object to errors in accounts promptly as decided in Aforka v. African
                   Continental Bank Ltd74.

     3.3.4 Rights / Defences of Customers
               1) The right to withdraw monies credited into customer's account. This is however
                   defendant on the circumstances of each case as decided in Prince & Ors v.
                   Oriental Bank Corporation 75 where judgment was awarded to plaintiff based
                   on the fact that delay was due to negligence of bank even though the branches
                   were different. Where they were same bank but if action is on breach of contract,
                   the branches would not be treated as same. See Woodland v. Fear76 where other
                   branches were held to be same and so, liable as the action was on cumulative
                   negligence. This brings in agency where the principal is vicariously liable for
                   negligence.

               2) The right not to have customers account debited on the account of forged
                   signature. See United Bank for Africa Ltd v. Savannah Bank of Nigeria Ltd77.

               3) The right to keep separate and distinct accounts as decided in British & French
                   Bank V. Opaleye78 and Bala Angyu v. Malami & Ors79.

               4) The right to have customers account credited with the face value of cheques paid
                   into his account for collection as decided in New Nigeria Bank Ltd v. Odiase80.

               5) The right to be given reasonable notice before closing customers account etc as
                   decided in Bank of Credit & Commerce International Nigeria Ltd & Ors v.
                   Stephen Industries Ltd & Ors81.

74 (1994) 3 NWLR (pt 331) 217
75 (1878) 3 App. CAS. 325
76 (1857) 26 L . J. O. B. 202
77 (1979) 10- 12 CCHCJ. 255
78 (1962) 1 All NLR. 26
79 Unreport CA/K 102/91 of 12 December, 1991.
80 (1993) 8 NWLR (pt. 310) 235.
81 (1992) 3 NWLR (pt. 232) 772.

                                                                                                                             40
                                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 4
          (a) Is there any precise statutory concept for the words; bank, banker and banking

               business?
          (b) Do the differently supposed statutory concepts of the word `bank' imply criminality on

               the actions of Ekpa, the Global Syndicate Investor?
          (c) Critically examine Banker and Customer Relationship?
          (d) Enumerate at least, three duties of a Customer to a Banker supporting your answer

               with judicial precedence where necessary.
          (e) Does a bank merely advising a person make such a person transit into a bank

               customer?
          (f) Do statutory intervention avail bankers in defence of wrongful discharge of their duties

               to a customer?

3.4 Summary
     The duties of a banker to a customer are not only to honour a customer's cheque but the duty
     to also notify the customer of closing his account, pay a customer the value of his cheques
     presented but can at the same time be dishonoured by the banker for fraud, wrongful
     endorsement, if on loan or overdraft, if inadequate funds but not swap clients' money for
     another charge.

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
        1) Igweike, Law of Banking in Nigeria
        2) Goldface Law of Banking in Nigeria

                                                                                                                             41
(a) No precise statutory concept of the words; `bank', `banker' and `banking business' aside mere descriptions                                                                     3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 4
    / explanations of the terms for its limited purpose and for facts from judicial pronouncements in decided    4 2
    cases.

(b) Small saving schemes do not come within the meaning / different concepts of not only the word `bank' but
    even the word `banker' and `banking business' even though the scope of banking is often determined by
    the established fact of debtor / creditor relationship which must be contractual in nature as decided in the
    case of WOODS v. MARTINS BANK LTD & ORS1where justice Salmon reiterates that; "...in my
    judgment, the limits of a banker's business cannot be laid down as a matter of law. The nature of such a
    business must in each case be matter of facts..." as even first decided in the case of FOLEY v. HILL 1
    before KPA's case.

(c) Banker customer relationship is basically that of a debtor and creditor relationship but must be contractual
    either by implication / as expressly stated by both parties as in the case of YUSUF v. COOPERATIVE
    BANK LTD 1where the court held that; "...the banker customer relationship is that of a debtor creditor the
    very moment the banker agrees to accept a person as its customer." However, from decided cases, the
    contract is simple, implied and partly written but not necessarily in a single, comprehensive and formal
    document. Although, a customer's account may at times not be in credit and he obtains a loan or overdraft
    from his banker so, the customer (creditor) automatically becomes the debtor and the banker, the creditor
    as seen in YA'U v. BANK OF THE NORTH LTD.

(d) The duties of a customer to a banker include
         i. Not to facilitate fraud by taking reasonable care in drawing cheques or other bank instruments as
            decided in SALAWU v. UNION BANK OF NIGERIA LTD1.
         ii. To follow proper banking procedures like paying monies into an account through the cashier being
            the proper channel as decided in BISI SALAWU v. UNION BANK OF NIGERIA LTD1.
         iii. To disclose forgery to banker as decided in these cases; NIGERIAN ADVERTISING
            SERVICE LTD. v. UNITED BANK FOR AFRICA LTD; GREENWOOD v. MARTINS BANK
            LTD. and in BROWN v. WESTMINISTER BANK LTD.

(e) Yes. Looking at the case of WOODS v. MARTINS BANK LTD & ORS where from the moment the bank
    agrees to advise a person even though the person had not opened an account with such a bank. Hence, in
    this case where the Plaintiff had no business experience but went to the defendant bank for advice on how
    and where to invest his money and the branch Manager advised him to invest in a private company that
    banked with his branch. The customer lost his money through negligence of the bank that allowed the
    defendant to over withdraw till it became bankrupt and consequently, defrauded the customer for which the
    bank was held liable as the defendant was regarded as a customer.

(f) Yes, it does and for instance, where there is inconsistency with a client's fiduciary obligation which arises
    when a customer operates a Trust account as was held in FULANI v. BANK OF BRITISH WEST
    AFRICA. Also, in circumstances where a banker must comply with Presidential directive to freeze an
    account and failure to comply will amount to a criminal offence whereas, no action can succeed in this
    regard against such a bank banker as decided in EFFIWATT v. BARCLAYS BANK D.C.O. NIGERIA
    LTD & ORS
MODULE 3 NATURE, TYPES, FUNCTIONS AND STRUCTURE OF THE BANKING
SYSTEM IN NIGERIA

Unit 1: Types, Functions and Structure of Banking in Nigeria

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Main Contents

         1.3.1 Nature of banking business in Nigeria
         1.3.2 Types and Structure of Nigerian Banks Carrying on Banking Business
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
1.6 Self-Assessment Exercises and Feedback

1.1 Introduction
       This module discusses the nature, types, functions and structure of banking in Nigeria. Also,
       the topic of maintenance of reserve funds was discussed.

1.2 Learning Outcome
       At the end of this Unit, you should be able to:
         (a) Know what the types and structure of banking is in Nigeria.
         (b) Identify the subsequent regulations that regulate banking business
         (c) State how the regulations helped cushion the financial insecurity bank customers and
              investors experienced
         (d) State / discuss the functions of Central and Commercial banks etc.

1.3 Types, Functions and Structure of Banking in Nigeria
         1.3.1 Nature of Banking Business in Nigeria
             Banking business in Nigeria was unguided prior to the Banking Ord. of 1952 and
             especially between 1945 and 1952 with the proliferation of banks in Nigeria that
             swindled their customers and investors such that, these customers and investors lost
             confidence in the Nigerian banking business. However, soon after, emerged the
             Banking Ord. of 1958 that was used alongside the Central Bank Act of 1959 and
                                                                                                                             43
    thereafter, came other extant Nigerian Banking regulations that now help to cushion
    the financial insecurity of all customers and investors. Whereas, prior to the Banking
    Ordinance of 1952, there was barely any indigenous statute regulating banking practice
    in Nigeria even though repealed in 1958 and used alongside with the Central Bank Act
    of 1958. However, the Banking Ordinance was later replaced by the Banking Act of
    1969 and further repealed by the Banks and Other Financial Institutions Decree
    (BOFID) of 1991 now BOFIA.

    For specific reasons, BOFIA regulates banking activities in Nigeria such that it grants
    the Central Bank Governor the power to grant, revoke and vary licenses to investors
    which drastically reduces swindling of customers. This led to the current emergence of
    many Commercial and Micro Finance Banks in Nigeria but other statutes regulating
    banking businesses include:

       1) The Central Bank Act, 1958
       2) The Central Bank Act of 1990 that prescribes the stamping of all bills / fixing

            duty stamps appropriately on paid bills
       3) Bank (Freezing of Account) Act of 1990 that empowers the President to freeze

            any account on fraudulent basis
       4) Bills of Exchange Act, 1990 that regulates the activities of parties like liabilities

            in drawing, use, delivery and acceptance of bills
       5) Dishonoured Cheques Offences Act, 1990 which makes it a criminal offence for

            a cheque drawer to settle debts with dude cheques
       6) The Evidence Act, 1990 now Evidence Act, 2011
       7) Money Lenders Act, 2004
       8) Exchange Control Act, 1990 etc that ultimately, reduced the swindling of

            customers and other bank investors now Exchange Control Act, 2004.
       9) Banks and Other Financial Institution Act [BOFIA]], 2007
       10) Banks and other Financial Institution Act, 2004

1.3.2 Types and Structure of Nigerian Banks Carrying on Banking Business
    They include the following:
      o Central Bank of Nigeria [CBN]
      o Commercial Banks
                                                                                                                   44
               o Merchant Banks
               o Development Banks
               o National Agricultural and Co-operative Bank [NACB]
               o The Federal Mortgage Bank
               o \Other Specialized Banks

             1) Central Bank of Nigeria [CBN]
                 The nature, functions and structure of the Central Bank of Nigeria includes that, it
                 is a Federal Government Bank that was established pursuant to the Central Bank
                 Ordinance of 1958 but took effect in 1959.82 However, with the Central Bank
                 (Currency Conversion) Act of 1967 and its subsequent amendments by the Central
                 Bank of Nigeria Decree No. 24 of 1991. Alongside the Banking Act of 1969,
                 conferred so much power of supervision, examination, monetary management and
                 more prudent banking standards on the Central Bank of Nigeria. The CBN
                 maintains a corporate status with perpetual succession and power to acquire and
                 dispose of moveable and immoveable properties, possesses a seal and powers to sue
                 and be sued. It issues the Nigeria's currency. The very first issue was in 1959 to
                 replace the British Pound Sterling of the West African Currency Bank [WACB]
                 before 1965 of the existing currency but exchanged in 1968 during the Nigerian
                 Civil war to curtail Biafran secession, before the 1973 Naira and kobo that replaced
                 the pound sterling earlier in operation. The structure includes a head office in Abuja
                 with the Governor of the Central Bank at the helm of affairs with zonal centers in
                 Bauchi, Enugu, Ibadan and Kano but with branches in each State capital
                 respectively headed by a Controller / Currency Center Officer / Zonal Controller
                 and Branch Controllers.

                 The CBN operates a unit-banking with these branches not as separate entities and
                 its Functions include:
                  (a) It is a Federal Government owned bank of any nation
                  (b) It is a Bankers Bank because it keeps the capital reserve of all other banks in a

                       nation

82 CBN BRIEFS No. 93/02 CBN Research Development Report at Pp. 1 -2, it is now Central Bank of Nigeria
9Establishment) Act, Cap. C4 LFN. 2004. See section 1. CBN Act

                                                                                                                             45
                  (c) It prints, mints and issues the country's currency
                  (d) It regulates monetary policy through its supply and withdrawal of money from

                       the public
                  (e) It executes monetary policies on behalf of the Government
                  (f) It executes capital projects on behalf of the Government
                  (g) It is a bank of last resort
                  (h) It keeps special capital deposits on behalf of commercial banks
                  (i) It enhances economic growth in a country through its monetary regulations
                  (j) It keeps the country's gold and foreign reserves
                  (k) It deals with foreign transactions on behalf of the Government
                  (l) It manages Nigeria's external debts and reserves
                (m) It handles problems of ailing banks in the country
                  (n) It is a financial adviser to the Federal government and other banks
                  (o) It prepares and publishes annual reports on accounts of other banks not later

                       than four months after the end of its financial year on their balance sheets profit
                       and losses.

             2) Commercial Banks
                 The nature, structure and functions of Commercial banks are generally banking
                 institutions that create money by the acceptance of deposits from customers which
                 they loan to out for interests but expected to be paid back to the creditor customer
                 on demand. However, these banks are expected to restrict their commercial short
                 term liquid loans to enable them mop up such payable credits to their customers on
                 demand. Section 61 of Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act [BOFIA] further
                 defines Commercial banks as any bank in Nigeria whose business includes the
                 acceptance of deposits withdrawal by cheques.83 The Structure of Commercial
                 banks is that of a branch-banking system with a head branch against the unit-
                 banking system where each branch operates as an independent organization
                 whereas, its functions include:
                  (a) They help customers keep their valuables safe and for instance are jewelries
                       and certificates.
                  (b) Give financial assistance to their customers through loans and overdrafts.

83 Halsburys Laws of England, 8th Ed. Vol. 3, Para. 30. See BOFIA Cap. B3 LFN. 2004.
                                                                                                                             46
     (c) Act as Executors and Trustees for their customers and for instance; is the
         administration of Wills and assets of dead customers.

     (d) Facilitate foreign trades through the issuing of travelers cheques and making
         foreign payments on behalf of their customers.

     (e) Acceptance of deposits and payment of cheques on demand by their customers.
     (f) Sell stocks and shares for customers.
     (g) Advise customers on investments etc.

3) Merchant Banks
    The nature, structure and functions of Merchant banks includes to performs pure
    banking and merchandise business by accepting deposits, opening of accounts,
    management of investments portfolios and financing businesses for restricted
    number of their customers through loans, syndicates and issuing of bonds. It was
    first established in Lagos in the year 1961 by Phillips Hills of London and it is
    structured not to accept deposits but to arrange for large loans for their selected
    customers through issuing of bonds, undertaking prospective projects and arranging
    loan syndicates and so, do not have liabilities that arise from demands.

    The functions of Merchant banks include:
     (a) To Finance Trade; real Estate; Agriculture; Industrial and Related activities like

         Capital Equipments.
     (b) To Issue and Deal in Shares; Debentures; Federal and State Stocks and Other

         Securities
     (c) To Take and Place Deposits; Deal in Money Market Instruments; Banker's

         Acceptance and Commercial Notes
     (d) To Arrange Syndicate Credits; Direct Loans and Over Drafts on short and Long

         terms
     (e) To Provide Trade Finance Services like Bills; Foreign Exchange Transactions

         and Letters of Credit.

                                                                                                              47
             4) Development Banks
                 The nature, structure and functions of the Development banks include; they are
                 group of banks that assist their clients in commercial, technical, managerial and
                 other areas of capital projects for developmental purposes especially after the
                 economic devastation that followed the II World War of 1945. The first
                 Development bank in Nigeria was in 1946 but dissolved by the Federal Government
                 and replaced with the Nigerian Development Board in 1949. However, the later was
                 replaced with the six Regional Development boards spread out in the North-East,
                 South-East, South-West, North-West, the Federal Capital Territory and the Colony
                 of Lagos which all cumulated into the National Industrial Development Bank
                 [NIDB] that respectively has branches in Bauchi, Aba, Akure, Kaduna, Abuja and
                 Lagos. The structure has a chairman at the helm of affairs, then the Managing
                 Director, three representatives of the Central Bank of Nigeria, one Federal Ministry
                 of Finance Representative and six Executive Directors for each of the six
                 headquarters.

                 Presently, the structure of the bank consists of the following banks:
                  (a) The National Industrial Development bank [NIDB];
                  (b) The National Agricultural and Co-operative Bank [NACB];
                  (c) The Nigerian Bank for Commerce and Industry [NBCI];
                  (d) The Federal Mortgage Bank of Nigeria [FMBN]
                  (e) The Nigerian Export-Import Bank [NEXIM]

                 These banks grouped under the Development banks are not directly under the
                 control of the Central Bank of Nigeria and so, they were not in any way affected by
                 its monetary policy until recently that the CBN was granted the power to examine,
                 appraise, understand and appreciate their significance because of the scope of their
                 operations.84 However, its functions include:

                  (a) It is a Federal Government creation
                  (b) It helps development specific sectors of the economy
                  (c) It finances Corporations

84 Section 23 of BOFIA [Amendment] Decree No. 33 of 1998
                                                                                                                             48
5) National Industrial Development Bank [NIDB]
    The nature, structure and functions of the National Industrial Development Bank
    [NIDB] is one of the Development banks and indeed the first of all Development
    banks following the restructuring of the Investment Company of Nigeria [ICON].
    It obviously sets the pace for other development banks to follow. Hence, its
    resources are biggest and it is structured along 13 Departments (Administration;
    Accounts; Staff Training; Appraisal; Development & Promotions; Company
    Secretariat; Investment Supervision; Management Consultancy; Legal Department;
    Finance Department; Research Department; Internal Audit Department; Reception
    and preparation Department) with its [NIDB] Managing Directors comprising of a
    chairman, a Managing Director, 3 CBN representatives and 1 Federal Ministry of
    Finance; and the 9 Departmental Managers that each headed a department as
    Managers.

    The functions of NIDB include:
     (a) Its primary aim is to encourage private investors
     (b) It handles banks accounts to ensure bank clients meet their debt payments
     (c) It Recruits Personnel and Administers the General Administration
     (d) It initiates and Promotes Development through Financial assistance
     (e) It Supervises Investments and the NDIB assisted projects
     (f) It Finances Reparation in terms of NDIB Investments
     (g) It Evaluates the Viability of Project Proposals
     (h) It Finances Research
     (i) It is Responsible for the Legal Approval of Projects etc.

6) National Agricultural and Co-operative Bank [NACB]
    The nature, structure and functions of the National Agricultural and Co-operative
    Bank [NACB] include that it was established by Decree No. 28 of 1978 and is
    concerned with investment in the agricultural sector by giving loans to farmer
    organizations, individuals and co-operatives for investment in agriculture. its source
    of funds include the Central bank, International Financial Institutions, International
    Bank for Reconstruction and Development called the World Bank, the African
                                                                                                              49
    Development Bank [ADB], the European Investment bank and the International
    Fund for Agricultural Development [IFAD]. Its structure consist a Chairman;
    Managing Directors and Chief Executives Directors (Operations, Finance, Services
    & Projects); A Non-Executive Director as Representative of the Ministry of
    Agriculture, Natural Resources and Rural Development; three Non-Executive
    Directors that are Representatives of the Central Bank of Nigeria; Controllers of
    Administration, Finance, Projects, Investments and Operations and finally, the
    Legal Adviser. The banks Functions include:
     (a) Maintains Consultancy Services
     (b) Feasibility Study of Agricultural Projects
     (c) Direct Finance of viable Agriculture and Agro-Allied Agencies
     (d) Granting Loans to Prospective Farmers
     (e) Facilitates Agricultural Banks Management Policies
     (f) Constitutes Structure etc.

7) Federal Mortgage Banks of Nigeria [FMBN]
    The nature, structure and functions of the Federal Mortgage Bank [FMBN] includes
    that it is a corporate organization that emerged from the Nigerian Building Society
    established in 1957 but repealed by Decree No. 7 of 1977 as the Federal Mortgage
    Bank [FMBN] with power to sue, be sued and perpetual succession and to provide
    long / short term loans to individuals and organizations. Its Source of fund includes:
    Equity and Loans; Deposits from Individuals, Mortgage Institutions / other persons;
    Borrowing from Other Banks and Financial Institutions and finally, from the 50%
    yearly Profits from its Reserve Funds and 25% of its Authorized Capital when it is
    Equal / Exceeds the Authorized Capital. Its Structure include: A Chairman;
    Managing Director; Director General for the Federal Ministries of Finance and
    Economic Development / their Representatives; Director General of the Federal
    Ministry of Housing, Urban Development and Environment; Chief Federal Lands
    Officer; Three Representatives of the Central Bank of Nigeria and for other persons
    who by character are experienced in housing, accountancy, law, finance /
    economics and in the opinion of the Minister, are suitable for appointments as board
    members. The functions of the bank include:

                                                                                                              50
   (a) To mobilize Savings from the Public
   (b) To furnish advise to prospective clients
   (c) To provide long/short term loans to Estate Agents and Property Developers
   (d) To Encourage National Development through Mortgages
   (e) To Accept Deposits and Savings from Mortgage Institutions
   (f) To Control and Supervise Mortgage Institutions through the Executive Council and
   (g) To Approve of A Minister Charged with housing responsibilities at competitive

        interest rates in other to guarantee loans from private investment sources towards
        building developments and to issue securities like Debentures, Bills of
        Exchange, Promissory Notes etc.

8) Maintenance of Reserve Funds
    The Maintenance of Reserve Funds was established by the 1952 Ordinance, and it
    requires each licensed bank to always maintain a cash reserve, as was necessary for
    adequate liquidity against its commitments, hold specified deposits and stabilized
    securities as may be prescribed from time to time by the CBN.

                                   SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 5
       a. State one way by which the CBN controls other banks in Nigeria
       b. State what is common to all the financial institutions in Nigeria
       c. Aside the Maintenance Reserve Funds being a major source of fund to banks

            what other source is available?
       d. Why establish specialized banks?

                                                                                                              51
1.4 Summary
      There are different types of banks that exist in Nigeria. The CBN now controls all monetary
      policies in Nigeria; and only the CBN also prints and mints Nigeria's currency. The Bank of
      Industry and Commerce became more relevant and especially these banks are all now
      corporate organizations that can acquire properties, sue and be sued. The maintenance
      reserve fund is meant for liquidity of banks against their commitments to customers and their
      investors. Hence, securities are key issues in the success of any bank.

1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
      1) Ekemini Udim, Principles of Garnishee Proceedings in Nigeria, Princeton & Associate
           Ltd. Lagos.
      2) Emeka Chianu, Law of Banking. Texts: Cases; Comments, New System Press Ltd.
           1995
      3) Goldface ­ Irokalibe I . J., Law of Banking in Nigeria. Malthouse Law Book 2013.
      4) Holden J.M; "History of Negotiable Instruments in English Law"[1st Ed.], Althone,
           London. 1955
      5) Igweke K.I; "Law of Banking and Negotiable Instruments" African Publisher Ltd.
           Rev. Ed. 2008, P. 1
      6) Olusegun Yerokun, casebook on Law of Banking (comments & cases) Nigeria
           Revenue Project Publications, 2015.
      7) Omotayo G; "A Dictionary of Finance" West Bourme, England: West Bourme
           Business School, 2007

1.6 Self-Assessment Exercises Exercise 5

                                                                                                                            52
a. The CBN controls other bank through its maintenance reserve fund policy against banks commitments
                                                                             towards their customers and investors

b. Their corporate status by being registered under Corporate Affairs Corporation [CAC] as required by
CAMA, acceptance of deposits from customers and other investors, sales of shares and stocks as well
                                                                                                      as debentures etc.

                        c. Other sources derive from borrowing from Other Banks and Financial Institutions
d. It is to meet with specialized development issues that are capital intensive and desire specialist attention

as structured alongside the functions of the specialized banks. For instance, the Federal Mortgage Bank
requires in its structure, three Representatives of the Central Bank of Nigeria and for other persons who
by character are experienced in housing, accountancy, law, finance / economics and in the opinion of
                                                the Minister, are suitable for appointments as board members.
MODULE 3 NATURE, TYPES, FUNCTIONS AND STRUCTURE OF THE BANKING
SYSTEM IN NIGERIA
Unit 2: Other Specialised Banks in Nigeria

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Other Specialised Banks in Nigeria

       2.3.1 Microfinance Banks
       2.3.2 Bank of Agriculture
       2.3.3 Community Banks
       2.3.4 Urban Development of Nigeria
2.4 Summary
2.5 References for Further Reading
2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 6

2.1 Introduction
     In the previous unit we considered what could be considered usual or common forms of banks
     operating in Nigeria. In this unit, you will learn about specialised banks, in the sense that these
     are banks set up or established specifically to promote a given project or to focus on the
     development of a specific industrial sector.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
     In this Unit, you should be able to know the critical role banking business plays in the
     development of the economic sectors.

2.3 Other Specialised Banks in Nigeria
         2.3.1 Micro Finance Banks
              The Micro Finance Banks are also called microcredit banks that provide services to
              unemployed or low-income individuals / groups who otherwise would have no other
              access to financial services.85 They are body corporate banks capable of suing and can
              be sued with perpetual seal for the purpose of acquiring, holding and disposing of
              properties and also provide credit needs of small borrowers that are unable to meet

85 Definition of Microfinance at: Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (Last accessed on March 10, 2020)
                                                                                                                             53
    onerous bank collateral requirements. They also provide deposits, loans, payments,
    money transfer and insurance services to the low-income earners in the society. They
    generate funds by borrowing from big banks, deposits from clients and accept equity
    investment which ownership stakes earn a share of the profits.

2.3.2 Peoples Bank of Nigeria now Bank of Agriculture (BOA)
    The nature, structure and functions of the Peoples Bank of Nigeria include its
    establishment in 1989 by Decree No. 22 of 1990 as a body corporate capable of suing
    and can be sued with perpetual succession and a common seal for the purpose of
    acquiring, holding and disposing of properties and as well provide credit needs of
    small borrowers that are unable to meet onerous collateral requirements. This bank
    has been merged with the Nigeria Agricultural Cooperative Bank to form Bank of
    Agriculture (BOA). The source of funds for the bank is from the Federal Government
    grants and loans; the Central Bank of Nigeria; Federal Government approved low
    interest sources; loans with low interest rates from other financial institutions etc. It is
    structured with a Chairman at the helm of affairs; followed by a Managing Director of
    the Bank itself and Four Other persons; A Representative each of the Economic Affairs
    Department of the Presidency, Governor of the Central Bank of Nigeria and the
    Minister of Finance and Economic Development. Its Functions include:
     (a) To provide credit needs for the less privileged like the artisans (mechanics, tailors,
         hairdressers, panel beaters etc) in the society
     (b) To increase the self-confidence of the less privileged at the grassroots
     (c) To accept savings from customers from small communities with small interests
         on such savings at repayment. Its Management Structure includes:

2.3.3 Community Banks [CMB]
    The nature, structure of the Community Bank [CMB] includes its establishment by the
    provisions of Section 1 (1) of Decree No. 46 of 1992 in 1990 which authorizes
    communities to establish Community banks. Its Management Structure includes a
    Chairman, Secretary usually appointed by the President and Commander in Chief of
    the Armed Forces of Nigeria; the Presidency itself and four Others; A Representative

                                                                                                                  54
    each of the Federal Ministries of Finance, Directorate of Food, Roads and Rural
    Infrastructures [DRFRI] Its Purpose / functions include:
     (a) To promote rural development as the name depicts
     (b) To enhance rapid productive developmental activities
     (c) To boost the self-confidence of the members of such communities
     (d) To economically empower the small-scale producers
     (e) To encourage entrepreneurship for job employments
     (f) To appropriately promote and supervise the funds towards development as it were.
     (g) To accept deposits from customers
     (h) To maintain and operate different types of accounts for its customers
     (i) To invest its excess funds on suitable bank instruments
     (j) To create loan facilities for its customers etc.

2.3.4 Urban Development Banks of Nigeria [UDBN]
    The Urban Development Bank of Nigeria [UDBN] was established by Decree No 51
    of 1992 as a limited liability company in line with the provisions of Company and
    Allied Matters Act [CAMA] of 2010 towards speedy urbanization and equally
    empowered by the finance minister to source for funds within and beyond Nigerian
    shawls. Its Functions include:
     (a) To manage the Federal Government off- shore procured funds
     (b) To promote and supervise urban development.

                              SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6
     a. State what function cuts across all the different types of banking business in

           Nigeria.
     b. State at least two the CBN mandatory requirements for banking business in

           Nigeria?
     c. In your opinion, do these other specialized banks meet the purpose for their

           establishment?

                                                                                                                  55
2.4 Summary              a. It is the function of giving loans to their customers
     Banking business enhanced and cushioned economic activities of customers and investors justb. The CBN mandatorily requires each licensed bank in Nigeria to at all
     as the regulations checked the financial insecurity hitherto experienced by banks that swindled
     investors and customers. Hence, the other specialized banks mentioned above indeed, providetimes maintain the minimum liquidity cash reserve not less than required
     credit needs of small borrowers that are unable to meet onerous bank collateral requirementsby the prescribed minimum of 50% yearly Profits from its Reserve
     and hence the structures for these specialized banks to enable them function basically forFunds and 25% of its Authorized Capital when it is Equal / Exceeds the
     purposes of loans and securities to small borrowers at different levels in other to meet withAuthorized Share Capital.
     the purpose for their establishment mentioned above. For instance is Uda Micro Finance Bankc. Yes, they reasonably do by public notice from the testimonies of
     of Nigeria, Ekpoma branch in Edo State to which at least a customer testified to immenselycustomers on their banking business activities.
     benefiting from with little or no stress especially on issue of security for loans.86

2.5 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 5

86 Dr. (Mrs) F.O.Olumese with a Current Account in Uda Micro Finance Bank, Ekpoma, Edo ­ State, Nigeria.
                                                                                                                             56
MODULE 3 NATURE, TYPES, FUNCTIONS AND STRUCTURE OF THE BANKING
SYSTEM IN NIGERIA
Unit 3: Universal Banking System [UBS], 2000

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Universal Banking System
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 7

3.1 Introduction
       The Universal Banking System [UBS], 2000 is responsible for the operational changes in
       Nigerian banking system. It led to the conversion of most existing banks in the industry into
       Commercial banks before being further enhanced by the Central Bank of Nigeria's embargo
       lift on licensing of upcoming banks. Henceforth it enables them perform the general
       functions of Commercial banks. However, the Nigerian banking system today, has
       increasingly become complex in structure, manpower requirements, ownership, and
       functions of banks in the banking sector.

3.2 Learning Outcome
       At the end of this class, you should know that the introduction of Universal Banking System
       [UBS] of 2000, led to the changes in the operational structure and functions of the banking
       business in Nigeria and this resulted in the conversion of most existing banks in the industry,
       into Commercial banks. This was further enhanced by the Central Bank of Nigeria embargo
       lift on licensing of upcoming banks which enabled them perform the general functions of
       Commercial banks. However, the Nigerian banking system today has increasingly become
       complex in structure, manpower requirements, ownership and functions.

3.3 Universal Banking System (UBS) 2000
       General Functions of Commercial Banks now includes the followings:

                                                                                                                             57
      (a) Duty to keep customers valuables safe as decided in Leese V. Martins.87
      (b) Duty to collect the face value of Bills of Exchange on behalf of the customer as decided

          in African Continental Bank Ltd v. Yusuf.88
      (c) Duty not to negligently advice customers on investments in order to avoid liability for

          damages etc as decided in Woods v. Martins Bank Ltd.89
      (d) Give financial assistance to their customers through loans and overdrafts and other

          securities
      (e) They act as Executors and Trustees for their customers and investors which for instance,

          include the administration of Wills and assets of dead customers.

                                       SELF-ASSESSMENT QUESTIONS 7

                       a) The UBS connotes what?
                       b) Which other law enhanced the commercial banking activities in

                          Nigeria
                       c) Do the functions of Commercial banks significantly differ from its

                          original function?

3.4 Summary
       The introduction of the Universal Banking System, 2000 into Nigerian banking system
       increased the scope of the functions of most banks and Commercial banks in Nigeria

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
       BOOKS
         1) Ekemini Udim, Principles of Garnishee Proceedings in Nigeria, Princeton & Associate
              Ltd. Lagos.
         2) Emeka Chianu, Law of Banking. Texts: Cases; Comments, New System Press Ltd.
              1995
         3) Goldface ­ Irokalibe I . J., Law of Banking in Nigeria. Malthouse Law Book 2013.
         4) Holden J.M; "History of Negotiable Instruments in English Law"[1st Ed.], Althone,
              London. 1955

87 [1871] L.R. 13 EQUITY 77
88 [1978] 2 SC 93, 1956 ­ 1984; 3 NSCC, 554
89 Supra

                                                                                                                             58
5) Igweke K.I; "Law of Banking and Negotiable Instruments" African Publisher Ltd.
    Rev. Ed. 2008, P. 1

6) Olusegun Yerokun, casebook on Law of Banking (comments & cases) Nigeria
    Revenue Project Publications, 2015.

7) Omotayo G; "A Dictionary of Finance" West Bourme, England: West Bourme
    Business School, 2007

8) Chip TAN (Sicherungsverfahren im Online-Banking) Halsburys Laws of England, 8th
    Ed. Vol. 3, Para. 30

9) The Pragmatic Review on Internet Banking and Associated Services in India  (PDF).
    International Journal of Computing and Corporate Research, 2014

INTERNET SOURCES:

10) USA Department of Treasury at: Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (Last

accessed on March 8, 2020)

11) "What is TAN (transaction authentication number) at : Error! Hyperlink reference

not valid.

12) Online Banking Security at: www.solidpass.com (Last accessed on March 3, 2020)

13) Online phishing which explains clean internet fraud through identity theft, card testing,

re-shipping and triangulation fraud at: Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (Last

accessed on March 2, 2020)

14) THE PRAGMATIC REVIEW ON INTERNET BANKING AND ASSOCIATED

SERVICES IN INDIA available at: https://journalofbusiness.org (Last accessed on

02, March, 2020) and available in Journal of Computing and Corporate Research,

India, 2014

15) DNI electronico de Espana/Spanish ID-cards (Last accessed on March 3, 2020)

16) Fatokun Dipo (CBN Director of Banking and Payment System) reports at Electronic

Fraud Forum, 2017 of increased fraud in Nigeria of 5.571 Billion Naira between the

year            2015-2017   and             available                            at:

https://www.natinalbusextra.com/2018/07/10/electronic-fraud. (Last accessed on

March 10, 2020

17) Meaning of TAN / PIN at: Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (Last accessed on

March 2, 2020) Also cited by Omotayo G; "A Dictionary of France" West Bourne,

England: West Bourne Business School, 2007

                                                                                 59
       18) Meaning of Spanish ID cards, evolution and meaning of DNI 3.0 fields/ Mobbee/ at:
             Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (Last accessed on March 3, 2020)

       19) Online phishing which explains clean internet fraud through identity theft, card testing,
             re-shipping and triangulation fraud at: Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. (Last
             accessed on March 2, 2020)

       20) Negotiable Instrument (Amendment) Act [No. 26] of 2016 gives appellate court
             powers to appeal against conviction at: Error! Hyperlink reference not valid. 9Last
             accessed on March 10, 2020).

      Other Sources:
       21) Central Bank of Nigeria BRIEFS No. 93/02 [CBN] Research Development Report
       22) Dr (Mrs) F.O.Olumese with a Current Account in Uda Micro Finance Bank,

             Ekpoma, Edo ­ State, Nigeria.
3.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 7

                                                                                                                            60
a) UBS connotes more open banking activities for commercial banks because it led to the
changes in the operational structure of banking business in Nigeria as it resulted in the
                    conversion of most existing banks in the industry into Commercial banks.

b) The CBN embargo lift on licensing of upcoming banks to henceforth, enable them perform
the general functions of Commercial banks also helped to enhance the operational functions
                                                                      and scope of commercial banks.

                                                  c) Yes because it expanded its scope and functions.
