 COURSE
   GUIDE
CLL805
LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I
Course Team

                F.O. ONAMSON, PhD (Course Developer/Writer)
                Dr. Ernest O. Ugbejeh (Dean/Course Editor) ­ NOUN
                Mr. Chukwuemeka Nwosu (Copy Editor) - NOUN

NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
© 2022 by NOUN Press
National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters
University Village
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway
Jabi, Abuja

Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos
e-mail: centralinfo@nou.edu.ng
URL: www.nou.edu.ng

Printed 2022

ISBN: 978-978-058-471-9

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, in any
form or by any means, without permission in writing from the publisher

                                                                                              ii
INTRODUCTION

The Law of Secured Credit Transactions, a two-semester course, is one
of the postgraduate courses at the Master of Laws (LLM) level. The
LLM programme and the courses, like the Law of Secured Credit
Transactions I, is designed to provide advanced training relevant to and
produce the needed higher manpower in the legal profession for
educational institutions, courtroom practice, public institutions, the
industry and commerce and the society in general. To align the Law of
Secured Credit Transactions I (the Course) to this general overarching
objective, the preparation and presentation of the Course drew heavily
from research, experience and strictly on current laws that underlie and
impact the area of secured credit transactions. The Course is the first of
the two semester programmes that constituted it.

Consequently, the first semester of the Course is concerned with the
following:

 An introduction to the laws that regulate secured credit
        transactions in Nigeria, including the Companies and Allied
        Matters Act 2020, Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act
        2017, Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act 2020, Bill of
        Sales Law of Lagos State, among others.

 Concepts, principles and nature of secured credit transactions,
        like debt security, debt financing options, numerus clausus of
        security interest, indicia of security interest, possessory and non-
        possessory interests, etc.

COURSE OBJECTIVES

To achieve the aims stated above, some general as well as specific
objectives have been pursued in the preparation and presentation of the
Course. While each unit within each module prefaced the specific
objectives, the general objectives to be successfully attained at the end
of the course material should not be lost sight of. Therefore, at the end
you should be able to:

1) Understand the sources of laws that regulate secured credit
        transactions in Nigeria

2) Understand the definition and nature of the secured credit
        transactions

3) Distinguish between the possessory and non-possessory security
        interests as against consensual and non-consensual security
        interests.

                                                                                             iii
4) Differentiate between proprietary right and security interest.
5) Know the different types of creditors.
6) Understand the difference between attachment of security interest

        and perfection
7) Know the meaning and implications of priority of interests
8) Distinguish between the various types of pledge and lien.
9) Understand the meaning, creation, and enforcement of mortgage
10) Know the meaning of collateral security

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE

To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units,
recommended books, relevant cases and other materials provided by
NOUN. Each unit contains a Self-Assessment Exercise, and at points in
the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment
purposes. At the end of the course there is a final examination. The
course should take you about 13 weeks to complete. You will find all
the components of the course listed below. You need to make out time
for each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.

COURSE MATERIALS

The major components of the course are.

a) Course guide.
b) Study Units.
c) Textbooks
d) Assignment file/Seminar Paper
e) Presentation schedule.

MODUILES AND STUDY UNITS

We deal with this course in 16 study units divided into 5 modules as
follows:

Module 1 Major Laws Regulating Secured Credit Transactions

Unit 1  Companies and Allied Matters Act, CAP C20 LFN 2004
Unit 2  Land Use Act, CAP L5 LFN 2004
Unit 3  Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act CAP B2 LFN
        2011
Unit 4  Bills of Sale Law Lagos State
Unit 5  Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017

                                                               iv
Unit 6  Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act CAP A11
        LFN 2004

Module 2 The Concept of Secured Credit Transactions

Unit 1  Types of Creditors
Unit 2  Debt Financing Options
Unit 3  The Concept of Security

Module 3 The Nature of Security Interest

Unit 1  How to Identify Security Interest
Unit 2  Numerus Clausus and Process of Security Interest

Module 4 Possessory Security

Unit 1  Pledge as a Form of Security
Unit 2  Lien as a Security
Unit 3  Enforcement of Possessory Security Interest

Module 5 Non-Possessory Security

Unit 1  Mortgages
Unit 2  Enforcement of Mortgage Security

All these Units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and
values, which merit your attention and thought. Tackle them in separate
study periods. You may require several hours for each. We suggest that
the Modules be studied one after the other, since they are linked by a
common theme. You will gain more from them if you have first carried
out work on the law of contract. You will then have a clearer picture into
which to paint these topics. Subsequent units are written on the
assumption that you have completed previous Units.

Each study unit consists of one week's work and includes specific
objectives, directions for study, reading materials and Self-Assessment
Exercises (SAE). Together with Tutor Marked Assignments, these
exercises will assist you in achieving the stated learning objectives of
the individual units and of the course.

TEXTBOOKS AND REFERENCES

Certain books have been recommended in the course. You should read
them where so directed before attempting the exercise.

                                                          v
ASSESSMENT

There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor Marked
Assignments, and a written examination. In doing these assignments you
are expected to apply the knowledge acquired during the course. The
assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment
following the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the
Assignment file. The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment
will count for 30% of your total score.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES

Self-assessment questions are raised at the end of each module to
measure the level of successful engagement with the legal issues
covered. The feedback (answers) in the body of the main text is distilled
and put up at the end of the course material. This will enable you to
understand and apply legal principles to practical situations in resolving
legal matters in the field of marine insurance law.

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING

The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and
will carry 70% of the total course grade. The examination will consist of
questions, which reflect the kinds of self-assessment exercises and the
tutor-marked problems you have previously encountered. All aspects of
the course will be assessed. You should use the time between
completing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire
course. You may find it useful to review yourself assessment exercises
and tutor-marked assignments before the examination.

COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken
down.

Assessment                      Marks

Assignments 1-4 (the best three of Four assignments. Best three

all the assignments submitted)  marks of the four counts at 30%

                                of course marks.

Final examination               70% of overall course score

Total                           100% of course score.

                                                             vi
COURSE OVERVIEW AND PRESENTATION SCHEDULE

Module /  Title of Work                   Weeks Assessment
  Unit                                    Activity (End of

                                                          Unit)

MODULE 1 MAJOR LAWS REGULATING
                   SECURED CREDIT
                   TRANSACTIONS

Unit 1    Companies and Allied Matters    1 Assignment
          Act, CAP C20 LFN 2020                   1

Unit 2 Property Legislations              Assignment
                                          2

Unit 3    Banks and Other Financial       Assignment
          Institutions Act CAP B2 LFN     3
          2020

Unit 4 Bills of Sale Law Lagos State      Assignment
                                          4

Unit 5    Secured Transactions in         Assignment
          Movable Assets Act 2017         5

Unit 6    Agricultural Credit Guarantee   Assignment
          Scheme Fund Act CAP A11 LFN     6
          2004

MODULE 2 THE CONCEPT OF SECURED
                   CREDIT TRANSACTIONS

Unit 1    Types of Creditors              Assignment
Unit 2    Debt Financing Options          7

                                          Assignment
                                          8

Unit 3 The Concept of Security            Assignment
                                          8

MODULE 3 THE NATURE OF SECURITY
                   INTEREST

Unit 1 How to Identify Security Interest  Assignment
                                          9

Unit 2    Numerus Clausus and Process     Assignment
          of Security Interest            10

                                          vii
MODULE POSSESSORY SECURITY             Assignment
      4                                11
                                       Assignment
  Unit 1 Pledge as a Form of Security  12
                                       Assignment
Unit 2 Lien as a Security              13

Unit 3  Enforcement of Possessory      Assignment
        Security                       14
                                       Assignment
MODULE NON-POSSESSORY                  15

5       SECURITY

Unit 1 Mortgages

Unit 2 Enforcement of Mortgages

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE

In distance learning, the study units replace the lecturer. The advantage
is that you can read and work through the study materials at your pace,
and at a time and place that suits you best. Think of it as reading the
lecture instead of listening to a lecturer. Just as a lecturer might give you
in-class exercise, you study units provide exercises for you to do at
appropriate times.

Each of the study units follows the same format. The first item is an
introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is
integrated with other units and the course as a whole. Next is a set of
learning objectives. These objectives let you know what you should be
able to do by the time you have completed the unit. You should use
these objectives to guide your study. When you have finished the unit,
you should go back and check whether you have achieved the
objectives. If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly
improve your chances of passing the course.

Self-Assessment Exercises (SAE) are interspersed throughout the units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the objectives of
the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the examination. You
should do each Self-Assessment Exercise as you come to it in the study
unit. Apart from the feedback (answers) to the SAE, examples are given
in the study units. Work through these when you have come to them.

                                       viii
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS

There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You
will be notified of the dates, times and location of the tutorials, together
with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are
allocated a tutorial group.

Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments. Keep a close
watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter.
Your tutor may help and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must send your Tutor Marked Assignments to your tutor well
before the due date. They will be marked by your tutor and returned to
you as soon as possible.

Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if:

 You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned
        readings.

 You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
 You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your

        tutor's comments on an assignment or with the grading of an
        assignment.

You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance
to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are
answered instantly. You can raise any problem encountered during your
study. To gain the maximum benefit from course tutorials, prepare a
question list before attending them. You will gain a lot from
participating actively.

TABLE OF CONTENT

                            MODULE/UNIT                   PAGE
MODULE 1: MAJOR LAWS REGULATING SECURED
CREDIT TRANSACTIONS                                         13
o Unit 1 Companies and Allied Matters Act, CAP C20 LFN      16
2004                                                        18
o Unit 2 Property Legislations                              20
o Unit 3 Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act CAP     24
B2 LFN 2020                                                 26
o Unit 4 Bills of Sale Law Lagos State
o Unit 5 Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017    28
o Unit 6 Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act      32
CAP A11 LFN 2004                                            37
MODULE 2: THE CONCEPT OF SECURED CREDIT
TRANSACTIONS
o Unit 1 Types of Creditors
o Unit 2 Debt Financing Options
o Unit 3 The Concept of Security

                                                                         ix
MODULE 3: THE NATURE OF SECURITY INTEREST

o Unit 1 How to Identify Security Interest          42

o Unit 2 Numerus Clausus and Processes of Security  49

Interests

MODULE 4: POSSESSORY SECURITY

o Unit 1 Pledge as a Form of Security               56

o Unit 2 Lien as a Form of Security                 64

o Unit 3 Enforcement of Possessory Security         69

MODULE 5: NON-POSSESSORY SECURITY

o Unit 1 Mortgages                                  73

o Unit 2 Enforcement of Mortgage Security           81

                                                        x
  MAIN
COURSE

CONTENT

Module 1 Major Laws Regulating Secured Credit

         Transactions.........................................     1

Unit 1   Companies and Allied Matters Act, CAP C20

Unit 2   LFN 2004.............................................     1
Unit 3
         Land Use Act, CAP L5 LFN 2004.................            5
Unit 4
Unit 5   Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act CAP

Unit 6   B2 LFN 2011.......................................        8

         Bills of Sale Law Lagos State.....................        11

         Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act

         2017....................................................  16

         Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act

         CAP A11 LFN 2004..................................        19

Module 2 The Concept of Secured Credit Transactions.. 22

Unit 1   Types of Creditors..................................... 22
Unit 2   Debt Financing Options............................... 28
Unit 3   The Concept of Security.............................. 34

Module 3 The Nature of Security Interest.................... 41

Unit 1   How to Identify Security Interest..................... 41
Unit 2   Numerus Clausus and Process of Security Interest. 49

Module 4 Possessory Security.................................. 57

Unit 1   Pledge as a Form of Security........................      57
Unit 2
Unit 3   Lien as a Security....................................... 66

         Enforcement of Possessory Security Interest......

Module 5 Non-Possessory Security...........................        77

Unit 1   Mortgages.............................................    77

Unit 2   Enforcement of Mortgage Security................          87
CLL805                                             MODULE 1

MODULE 1        PRINCIPAL LAWS REGULATING
                SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS

Unit 1  Companies and Allied Matters Act, CAP C20 LFN 2004
Unit 2  Land Use Act, CAP L5 LFN 2004
Unit 3  Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act CAP B2 LFN
        2011
Unit 4  Bills of Sale Law Lagos State
Unit 5  Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017
Unit 6  Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act CAP A11
        LFN 2004

UNIT 1 COMPANIES AND ALLIED MATTERS ACT,
               CAP C20 LFN 2004

Unit Structure

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
1.3 Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
1.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction

The law of secured credit is set against a docket of laws that regulate
secured transactions in Nigeria. In this module you will come across the
principal laws in this area, which are:

a) Companies and Allied Matter Act 2004 (CAMA) 2020
b) Property Legislation The relevant property legislation affecting

        secured credit law are Land Use Act (LUA) Cap L5 Laws of the
        Federation of Nigeria 2004; Property and Conveyancing Law
        1959 and Conveyancing Act 1881
c) Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act (BOFIA) 2020
d) Bills of Sale Law CAP B2, Volume 1 Laws of Lagos of Nigeria
        2003
e) Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act (STMA) 2017
f) Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act CAP A11 Laws
        of the Federation of Nigeria 2004.

Beyond the above list, other legislations that impact on secured credit in
Nigeria include the Property and Conveyancing Law (or its equivalent,
Conveyancing Act 1881), Admiralty Jurisdiction Act 2004, Sheriff and
Civil Process Act CAP A5 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 2004,

                                                                                              1
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Civil Aviation Act 2006, Merchant Shipping Act 2007, Assets
Management Corporation of Nigeria Act 2010 (including its
amendments), Civil Procedure Rules of the various State High Courts
(For instance, see Order 59 Rule 2(c) Lagos State High Court (Civil
Procedure) Rules 2019) and the various statutory instruments made
pursuant to other principal or enabling enactments. You are strongly
encouraged to check out the foregoing enactments relative to secured
credit.

1.2 Intended Learning Outcome

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:
     explain the relationship between CAMA and secured credit
        transactions by companies registered and operating in Nigeria.

1.3 Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020

CAMA as one of the principal laws regulating secured credit in Nigeria
is pervasive. This is because the law is the foundation for every
corporate activity in Nigeria. Even if there is no specific provision in
CAMA respecting secured credit in Nigeria, the law would still find
application here because no company comes into existence without
CAMA.

An entity can only come into existence after the promoters have
complied with the requirements of the law regarding the formation,
registration and management of companies in Nigeria. Can you recall
the principal requirements and procedures for the formation of
companies in Nigeria? Independent of the contents of the memorandum
of association, the company has inherent statutory power to borrow
money and charge its assets as security for repayment: see sections 48
CAMA 2020 and Part B, Chapter 9, particularly section 191 CAMA
2020 thereof. Are there any differences between memorandum of
association and articles of association of a company? On these, compare
sections 27 and 32 CAMA and National Palm Produce Association of
Nigeria Ltd (GTE) & Anor V. Udom & Ors (2013) LPELR-21134 (CA).

It is now settled that the company has inherent powers to borrow money.
Do you think that this inherent power to borrow money extends to
furnishing the assets, property and business of the company as security
by way of mortgage or charge? In fact, even without the inherent powers
of the company to borrow money, where the company, acting through its
directors, does an act which is beyond the powers of the company, the
company nevertheless will be bound as against third parties: ss 45 and
46 CAMA; A. G. Leventis & Co (Nig.) Plc v. Modu (2018) LPELR-
45375 (CA). The critical role of CAMA as a principal instrument

2
CLL805  MODULE 1

regulating secured credit transactions in Nigeria by corporate entities
could be seen in debentures and the consequent obligation to register
security, for example, charges, furnished by companies in repayment of
debt - s 197 CAMA (to be discussed later).

      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 1

a) Comment on the statement that "even if there is no specific provision in
     CAMA as regards security interest, the law will still be relevant to the
     subject of security."

b) Provide at least two authorities to corroborate the position that "a company
     has inherent powers to borrow money."

c) Identify at least one critical role of CAMA in the context of secured
     transactions.

1.4 Summary

CAMA 2020 is one of the principal legislations that regulate secured
transactions in Nigeria. Generally, CAMA is required to form, register
and incorporate a company, the basis on which a company can begin
business and enter into secured credit transactions. Specifically, the law
made provisions for transactions affecting secured credit in Nigeria.

1.5 Reference/Further Reading

Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020.

        3
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

1.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 1

 a) The statement is true because security interests are created by
          companies and individuals. Before a company comes into
          existence, it must be registered under CAMA. Therefore, apart
          from the provisions of CAMA on the creations of charges and
          debentures, the law is critical because any company in Nigeria is
          founded upon the pedestal of CAMA

 b) The authorities to corroborate the position are:
  i. Sections 45 and 46 CAMA
 ii. A.G. Leventis & Co (Nig) Plc v Modu (2018) LPELR-45375 (CA)
 c) One of the critical roles of CAMA as legislative instrument

          regulating secured credit transactions in Nigeria is in the area of
          debentures and the requirement of registration.

4
CLL805  MODULE 1

UNIT 2 PROPERTY LEGISLATIONS

Unit Structure

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
2.3 Property Legislations

        2.3.1 Land Use Act Cap L5 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
2.6 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction

The principal federal legislation affecting and regulating transactions,
including the use of land as security for repayment of debt or discharge
of an obligation, is the Land Use Act (LUA). LUA is an overarching
legislative instrument. In the context of this course, only the relevant
sections of LUA that affect or impact secured credit will be referenced.
These are section 1, the vesting provision and section 22 the consent
provision. Notwithstanding, it must not be lost on you that other
legislative instruments impact the use of land as security for repayment
of debt. For instance, the Conveyancing Act (CA) at section 20 as well
as the Property and Conveyancing Law (PCL) at section 125, provides
for the conditions which must be fulfilled before the mortgagee's power
of sale becomes exercisable. See sections 19(1) and section 123(1) of
CA and PCL respectively. As you will come across these laws in greater
detail in this course, only Land Use Act will be discussed in this unit.

2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of this Unit, you will be able to:
     analyse the unique position of LUA as a principal legislation
        affecting secured credit in Nigeria.

2.3 Property Legislations

2.3.1 Land Use Act

The critical position of LUA is understandable against the backdrop of
its salient provisions. Adopting the principle of trusteeship analogous to
the position of the principal head of the family in respect of communal
land, the LUA vests in the Governor all lands comprised in the territory
of each state and commanded that "such land shall be held in trust and
administered for the use and common benefit of all Nigerians": Section
1 LUA; Airtel Networks Ltd v. AG of Kwara State & Anor (2014)

                                                                                              5
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

LPELR-23790 (CA). Consequently, all transactions in land by any
person without the consent of the head trustee, the Governor, are void.
Specifically, you may wish to check up on Section 22 LUA; and the
case of Mbanefo v. Agbu & Anor (2014) LPELR-22147(SC). You must
always bear this in mind throughout the course and in practice.

Noting the influence of LUA in this connection, it has been pointed out
that the LUA has drastically altered the gamut of law as to land and
dealings with it, especially through mortgages and other forms of
alienation. (Goldface-Irokalibe, 2007:170) While further discussions on
the influence of LUA on secured credit will be found in appropriate
sections of the Course.

 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2
1) Who is the head trustee of lands comprised in each State and why?
2) Makun Limited created deed of legal mortgage in favour of Alheri

          Community Bank Ltd. Advise the bank on the role of Land Use Act in
          the transaction.

2.4 Summary

There are property legislations that impact on secured credit transactions
in Nigeria. Prominent among such laws is the Land Use Act, which
makes it mandatory for the consent of the Governor of a State to be
sought and obtained in respect of transactions in land comprised in any
state of the Federation. This is in addition to other laws too.

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Conveyancing and Law of Real Property Act 1881.

Land Use Act Cap L5 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria 2004.

Goldface-Irokalibe, I.J. (2007). Law of Banking in Nigeria (Lagos:
        Malthouse Law Books, 2007).

Property and Conveyancing Law Cap 100 Laws of Western Nigeria
        1959.

Smith, I.O. (2007). Practical Approach to Law of Real Property, 2nd ed
        (Lagos: Ecowatch Publications).

6
CLL805  MODULE 1

2.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

  1) The Governor is the head trustee. Because s 1 LUA vests all lands
      comprised in each state in the Governor to hold and administer for the
      benefit of all Nigerians.

  2) The role of Land Use Act in the transaction is that the consent of the
      Governor must be sought and obtained. Otherwise, the deed of legal
      mortgage would be void for absence of such a consent.

        7
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 3 BANKS AND OTHER FINANCIAL
               INSTITUTIONS ACT (BOFIA) 2020

Unit Structure

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
3.3 Banks and Other Financial Institutions ACT 2020
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
3.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction

The outlook of any country's economy is dependent on the supply of
credit, which itself is a function of the health of the financial system.
Deposit money banks play a vital role in any financial system, and
Nigeria is not an exception. Efficiency of financial intermediation is a
determinant of the efficiency of the financial system. Financial
intermediation is mainly the interplay of the surplus and deficit
economic units of society. As a result, the legal system cannot stand
aloof. Therefore, among other legislative instruments (for instance, the
Central Bank of Nigeria Act 2007), the BOFIA was enacted to regulate
the activities of deposit money banks in Nigeria as it relates to and
affects their capacity to extend credit.

3.2 Intended Learning Outcome

By the end of this unit, you will be able to:

 explain the role of bankers in the context of the legal regime
        affecting secured credit transactions.

3.3 Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act (BOFIA)
       2020

The law repealed the BOFIA 2004. It is the legal regime regulating
banking business in Nigeria. Pursuant to the law except you meet the
requirements for the grant of licence you cannot purport to carry on
banking business: Sections 2 and 3 BOFIA 2020; Audu v. FRN (2018)
LPELR-46643(CA). Among other, the advance of credit or grant of
loans is at the core banking business FCMB Plc V. Benbok Ltd (2014)
LPELR-23505 (CA).

8
CLL805                                            MODULE 1

Viewed in the context of secured credit transaction, BOFIA is pro-
secured creditor to the extent that it discourages the advance of financial
accommodation without security for its repayment. The law insists that
bankers must obtain security for every advance loan and in this
connection provides that it is an offence to extend to any person any
advance, loan or credit facility or give any financial guarantee or incur
any other liability on behalf of any person so that the total value of the
advance, loan, credit facility, financial guarantee or any other liability in
respect of the person is at any time more than twenty per cent of the
shareholders fund unimpaired by losses or in the case of a merchant
bank not more than fifty per cent of its shareholders fund unimpaired by
losses: Section 19(1)(a) BOFIA 2020. Where the banker finances the
acquisition of a motor vehicle, the subject matter of acquisition is a
security for the repayment of the loan used to acquire the vehicle.

Thus, the right of the banker is protected to the extent that the law
criminalizes the sale, disposal or otherwise parting with the possession
of a motor vehicle on which a loan obtained from the bank is still
outstanding without first obtaining the consent in writing of the bank
prior to the sale or disposal. On this see, Section 1(1) Banks (Motor
Vehicle Loans) (Miscellaneous Provisions) Act CAP B4 LFN 2020.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3

1) The supply of credit is directed related to a country's economic growth.

(a) Agree          (b) Don't agree  (c) It applies to advanced

        economies

2) Furnish authorities to support the position carrying on the business of
    banking in Nigeria is hinged on the fulfilment of prerequisites required
    thereto.

3) BOFIA discourages the grant of ___________ without security for its

3.4repaSymuemntm. ary

The financial system being an interplay of surplus and deficit economic
units determines the flow credit in any economy. The BOFIA among
others is designed to protect creditors who embark and frequently are
parties in secured credit transactions.

3.5 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Banks and Other Financial Institutions Act 2020.
Central Bank of Nigeria Act 2007.

                                                                              9
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1) (a) Agree

2) The authorities are sections 2 and 3 BOFIA 2020; Audu v. FRN (2018)
    LPELR-46643(CA).

3) Financial accommodation.

10
CLL805  MODULE 1

UNIT 4 BILLS OF SALE LAW OF LAGOS STATE

Unit Structure

4.1 Introduction
4.2 Intended Learning Outcome
4.3 Bills of Sale Law Lagos State
4.4 Summary
4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
4.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

4.1 Introduction

Before 2017 the law of secured credit in Nigeria was in a disoriented
state. Then apart from CAMA the other law that presents a semblance of
statutory regulation of secured credit in movable assets is the Bills of
Sale Laws of the various states of the federation. Notwithstanding the
STMA 2017, Bills of Sale Law still has application in personal property
security. Historically, Bills of Sale Law is a product of statute of general
application and thus derives its foundation from the received English
Bills of Sale Act 1878.

4.2 Intended Learning Outcome

By the end of the unit, you will be able to:

 explain the extent of application of Bills of Sale Law to secured
        credit transactions.

4.3 Bills of Sale Law of Lagos

Before the passage of the STMA in 2017, Bills of Sale Law is the only
law regulating security in personal or movable assets in Nigeria. The
Nigerian Supreme Court states that "a bill of sale, like a deed of
conveyance, is a contractual document in the sense that it is a more
formal document made pursuant to and giving effect to an antecedent
agreement," Per Ayoola JSC in, The Vessel Leona II v. First Fuels Ltd
(2002) LPELR-1284.

According to Wikipedia, "a bill of sale is a document that transfers
ownership of goods from one person to another. It is used in situations
where the former owner transfers possession of the goods to a new
owner. Bills of sale may be used in a wide variety of transactions:
people can sell their goods, exchange them, give them as gifts or
mortgage them to get a loan." It has been clarified that "a bill of sale
will detail a transfer of property or sale of items between a seller and

                                                                                            11
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

buyer. This type of document serves as legal evidence that the seller
transferred his or her rights to the assets described in the bill of sale."

There are two types of bills of sale ­ absolute bills of sale and
conditional bills of sale. Absolute bills of sale evidence assignments,
transfers and other assurances of personal chattels. They are not more
than usual contract of sale of goods. In this context, a bill of sale
includes bills of sale, assignments, transfers, declarations of trust
without transfer, inventories of goods with receipt attached thereto, or
receipts for purchase moneys of goods, and other assurances of personal
chattels, and powers of attorney, authorities or licences to take
possession of personal chattels as security for any debt." See section
3(1) of the Law for the very wide definition of "a bill of sale" as well as
"personal chattels".

Conditional bills of sale, covered under Part 3 of the Law, relates to bills
of sale as security for the payment of money. According to Section 8 of
the Law, "a bill of sale given or made by way of security for the
payment of money by the grantor thereof shall be void unless made in
accordance with the form in the Schedule hereto." Meanwhile, it is
important to note that bills of sale are more suited for transactions
involving individuals and non-financial institutions. This is because
companies and bankers will prefer to find their security under the STMA
2017 or CAMA 2020 where they are offered a greater degree of
protection and control using the instrument of the National Collateral
Registry (See Credit Reporting Act 2017) maintained by the Central
Bank of Nigeria or charges registry in Corporate Affairs Commission.
Another reason is that Bills of Sale Law has restrictive application as far
as secured credit is concerned. Similarly, the Bills of Sale Law does not
apply to debentures (section 17), after-acquired property (section 10),
and obviously it cannot apply to purchase money security interest. You
may wish to compare (sections 3(2), 15(2)(b) and 27 STMA 2017).

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4
1) What do you consider to be the differences between Secured Transactions

   in Movable Assets Act and Bills of Sale Law?
2) Identify the distinguishing feature that set apart the Bills of Sale Law of

   the various states of the federation.
3) While the Central Bank of Nigeria maintains ____________, the

   Corporate Affairs Commission maintains the ___________.

12
CLL805                                                     MODULE 1

Every bill purporting to create security interest in personal property (a)
must be in accordance with the Schedule A form, see Table 1-4 below;
(b) shall have annexed thereto or written thereon a schedule containing
an inventory of the personal chattels comprised in the bill of sale and (c)
must be attested by one or more witnesses, not being party or parties
thereto (section 14). Failure to attest and register a bill of sale renders it
void for the purpose of creating security interest in respect of the
personal chattels comprised therein in favour of any creditor. The law
provides registration to be made "within seven clear days after the
making or giving of such bill of sale." The place of registration is the
Bills of Sale Registry at the Directorate of Commercial Law in the
Ministry of Justice, Lagos. The nature of security interest capable of
being created under this Law is non-possessory and the grounds for
enforcement of the security (sections 12 and 13).

See the table below for an example of Form A of Bill of Sale for the
purpose of granting security interest in personal property:

  SAMPLE FORM A BILL OF SALE USED AS SECURITY FOR
                                    PAYMENT

 This Indenture is made the----------- day of--------------------------------------------

 between A.B. -------------------------- of ------------------------------------- of the one part
 and C.D.----------------------- of ------------------------of the other part witnesses that in
 consideration of the sum---------------- of now paid to A.B. by C.D. the receipt of
 which the said A.B. hereby acknowledges (or whatever else the consideration may
 be), he the said A.B. doth hereby assign unto C.D. his executors, administrators and
 assigns, all and singular the several chattels and things specifically described in the
 schedule hereto annexed by way of security for the payment of the sum of -------------
 ------------------------------------------------- and interest thereon at the rate of -----------
 ------------------ per cent per annum (or whatever else may be the rate). And the said
 A.B. doth further agree and declare that he will duly pay the said C.D. the principal
 sum aforesaid together with the interest then due by equal payments of-----------------
 ------- on the--------- day of---------------------- (or whatever else may be the
 stipulated time or times of payment). And the said A.B. doth also agree with the said
 C.D. that he will-------- (here insert terms as to insurance, payment of rent, or
 otherwise which the parties may agree to for the maintenance or defeasance of the
 security).

Provided always that the chattels hereby assigned shall not be liable to seizure or to

be taken possession of by the said C.D. for any cause other than those specified in

section 12 of the Bills of Sale Law.

 In witness, etc.
4.4 Summary

 --------------------- Signed and sealed by the said A.B.

in the presence of E.F.

(Add witness' name, address and description):              13
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Despite the enactment of Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017, the
Bills of Sale Law of the various states are still of present relevance as far
as secured credit transactions are concerned. The only limitation is that
it is limited to transactions involving individuals.

4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Bills of Sale Law of Lagos State.

Onamson, F.O. (2017). Law and Creditor Protection in Nigeria. Lagos:
        Malthouse Law Books.

Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017.

http://lagosministryofjustice.org/directorates/directorate-of-commercial-
        law/

https://www.contractscounsel.com/t/us/bill-of-sale#toc--how-can-i-
        write-a-bill-of-sale-

https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bill_of_sale

14
CLL805                                               MODULE 1

4.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 4

1) The difference between STMA and Bills of Sale Act are the
        STMA is a federal enactment, the Bills of Sale Law is a state
        law; only companies can create and register security under the
        STMA; but both companies and individuals can create and
        register security under Bills of Sale Law; and Bills of Sale Law
        apply to absolute transactions involving outright sale while
        STMA is limited to creation of security interests only.

2) The distinguishing characteristics of Bills of Sale Law of the
        various states is that it is a statute of general application based
        on the English Bills of Sale Act 1878.

3) The Central Bank of Nigeria maintains the National Collateral
        Registry while the Corporate Affairs Commission keeps the
        charges register.

                                                     15
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 5 SECURED TRANSACTIONS IN MOVABLE
               ASSETS ACT (STMA) 2017

Unit Structure

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
5.3 Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017
5.4 Summary
5.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
5.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

5.1 Introduction

Propped by the desire to improve the country's ranking on the Ease of
Doing Business Index, the Nigerian government took innovative and
comprehensive steps to overhaul the business climate. The steps taken in
2017 included repealing the CAMA and enacting CAMA 2017,
enactment of Credit Reporting Act 2017 and STMA 2017.

5.2 Intended Learning Outcome

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 Iidentify the STMA 2017 as the main law regulating security
        interest in personal property.

5.3 Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017

The STMA 2017 is an attempt to create a unitary regime of secured
transactions in personal property in Nigeria. Among other objectives, the
STMA is directed at facilitating access to credit secured with movable
assets, perfection of Security Interests in movable assets and realisation
of Security Interests in movable assets. Part of the process of achieving
the objectives is the creation of National Collateral Registry.1 The
STMA revolutionised the secured credit climate with respect to the
creation of personal property security interests.

However, the STMA is an elitist piece of legislation, applying only to
security interests created in favour of a financial institution, particularly
deposit money banks.2 This means that an individual or even a company
cannot create security interest in favour of a non-financial institution and

1 For details, see the link: https://www.ncr.gov.ng/Home/About
2 To use the Collateral Registry, one must a registered client. A registered client has to be a financial
institution.

16
CLL805  MODULE 1

purport to register at the National Collateral Registry.3 This is a major
drawback of the Act. Further, you must know that the STMA 2017 does
not seek to supplant or overreach the prime position of the LUA or
CAMA.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 5
1) The STMA 2017 is innovative and ground-breaking. Despite this,

     it has its limitations with reference to application. Comment.
2) The STMA 2017 is disruptive and has brought about an unwieldy

    situation between its application and CAMA 2020. Do you agree?
    Give reasons for your answer.

Consequently, while the law applies to all security interests in movable
assets created by an agreement that secures payment or the performance
of an obligation,4 it neither applies to the creation or transfer of an
interest in land other than account receivables5 nor does it prevent the
creation of security interest in the form of charges by companies
registered under CAMA.6 At this point, we shall pause a discussion of
the STMA since references and commentaries will be made to it in
relevant aspects of the course.

5.4 Summary

The STMA 2017 is an innovative piece of legislation that has brought
clarity and certain to an otherwise disparate and dislocated system. The
law has made great and commendable inroads into secured credit
transactions regime in Nigeria. Today creditors are better off.

5.5 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017.

Visit National Collateral Register at
        https://www.ncr.gov.ng/Home/About

3 For additional information visit, https://www.ncr.gov.ng/Search/Search/Search
4 Section 2(1)(a) STMA 2017
5 Section 2(2)(b) STMA 2017
6 Section 2(3) STMA 2017

                                                                                            17
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

5.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise 5

1) The STMA is innovative and ground-breaking, but these outstanding
     qualities are beclouded by the limitations of the Act. It does not apply
     to security interests in immovable property and to interests in ships and
     aircrafts.
     I disagree. This is because its area of focus or application is well set out
      in the law. Secondly, the STMA 2017 does not apply to all species of
     secured credit transactions.

2) interests in land or charges.

18
CLL805                                                  MODULE 1

UNIT 6  AGRICULTURAL CREDIT GUARANTEE SCHEME
        FUND ACT 2004

Unit Structure

6.1 Introduction
6.2 Intended Learning Outcome
6.3 Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act 2004
6.4 Summary
6.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
6.6 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercises

6.1 Introduction

According to Corporate Finance Institute, "a sinking fund is a type of
fund that is created and set up purposely for repaying debt. The owner of
the account sets aside a certain amount of money regularly and uses it
only for a specific purpose. Often, it is used by corporations for bonds
and deposits money to buy back issued bonds or parts of bonds before
the maturity date arrives. It is also one way of enticing investors because
the fund helps convince them that the issuer will not default on their
payments." This is obviously what the Federal Government aimed to
achieve with the enactment of the Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme
Fund Act Cap B2 Laws of the Federation of Nigeria (LFN) 2004.

6.2 Intended Learning Outcome

By the end of the unit, you will be able to:

 discuss how the law here is designed as a special vehicle for
        encouraging the flow of credit to agribusiness in Nigeria.

6.3 Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act 2004

The Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act established the
Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund. This is a sinking fund into
which shall be subscribed a certain sum to provide guarantees for loans
granted for agricultural purposes by any bank. In other words, the fund
creates a security for the bankers7 with the objective stimulating,
encouraging and stimulating the diversification of the country's
monolithic economic system. If well implemented and supported by the
banks, the scheme would create a major boost in agribusiness and thus
increase in the country's gross domestic product.

7 See the Long Title of the Act.

                                                                                            19
CLL805                       LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

The fund boasts of 50 billion NGN8, while a guarantee of up to 50
million NGN can be provided for any loan to any individual. While the
law must be hailed as a good initiative it does not provide total succor to
the farmer. This is because the farmer is still expected to furnish
security, where the amount of the loan is more than 100,000 NGN (less
than 300USD).9 Further and detailed discussion of the law will be
treated in the Course.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6
a) Why do you think that the Agricultural Credit Guarantee

         Scheme Fund Act does not provide succour to the Nigerian farmer?

6.4 Summary

The subject of secured credit transactions is of present interest even to
the Federal Government. This is evidence of the critical role the supply
of credit plays in an economy. Thus, the Agricultural Credit Guarantee
Scheme Fund Act is a conscious effort by the government to provide
comfort to the providers of credit, the banks.

6.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Agricultural Credit Guarantee Scheme Fund Act Cap B2 Laws of the
        Federation of Nigeria (LFN) 2004.

The Corporate Finance Institute. "Sinking Fund". Available at
        https://corporatefinanceinstitute.com/resources/knowledge/financ
        e/sinking-fund/

8 Section 5 of the Act
9 Section 10(1) of the Act.

20
CLL805  MODULE 1

6.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise
   The requirement of security for loan amount in excess of 100,000 NGN
   (less than USD300) is its major drawback and can work against the farmer.

        21
CLL805                             LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

MODULE 2                THE CONCEPT OF SECURED CREDIT
                        TRANSACTIONS

Unit 1     Types of Creditors
Unit 2     Debt Financing Options
Unit 3     The Concept of Security
Unit 4     Assets Amenable to Security Interest

UNIT 1 TYPES OF CREDITORS

Unit Structure

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
1.3 Types of Creditors

        1.3.1 Adaptive Creditors
        1.3.2 Semi-Adaptive Creditors
        1.3.3 Involuntary Creditors
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
1.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction

The supply of credit is a driver of economic activity. Companies
represent the vehicle through which economic activities are ventilated.
In fact, this has resulted in dominance of companies as the foundation of
economic activity. The glaring importance of companies will be
appreciated when it is known that 47.42% of global revenue in 2015
were locked in the hands of private businesses in the form of
corporations, while the top ten corporations in the world accounted for
7.42% of global GDP in the same period.1 To achieve these heights and
remain dominant players companies rely on the supply of credit.
Generally, there are three discernible sources of finance by which any
company can finance its operations. These are equity, debt and retained
profits. Equity is the contribution of the members to the company and
expressed in shares. Debt is represented by borrowing, which can be
secured or unsecured. Retained profits is a surplus and is arrived at after

1 "Study: big corporations dominate list of world's top economic entities" Global Study. The

Guardian.  (Mon         12  Sep    2016).                   Available  online                at

https://www.theguardian.com/business/2016/sep/12/global-justice-now-study-multinational-

businesses-walmart-apple-shell; also see, How the world's biggest companies compare to the

biggest    economies".      World  Economic                 Forum.     Available             at

https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/10/corporations-not-countries-dominate-the-list-of-the-

world-s-biggest-economic-entities/. All accessed 27/4/2020

22
CLL805  MODULE 2

deducting expenses, payment of taxes and dividend (if declared). When
it is said that credit is a life wire, it is usually viewed from the
perspective of its role as a catalyst for economic development and
explained in terms of its efficiency as to commercial enterprises.

Moreover, there is a correlation between the availability of credit and
the efficiency of a country's financial system. What then is credit? In the
context of this course, it refers to financial accommodation granted or
extended by a person called the "creditor" to another person called the
"borrower."2 In the Nigerian case of UBA plc v. Amsata Supersandals
Manufacturing Company Ltd & Ors,3 the court drew a difference
between credit facility and letter of credit. When a credit facility is
granted, it may be secured or unsecured; this has given rise to types of
creditors. Largely, the class of creditors, the concern of this course, is
credit relationships arising between corporate entities. Where credit
relationships exist, it is always between the creditor and the debtor. The
creditor may be secured or unsecured. The principal object of every
credit relationship is the presence of a loan or debt security (like
debenture). Where the loan or debenture is secured, it means that the
creditor acquired real security or collateral security. The creditor who
extracts security interest from the debtor does so for some reasons. You
will find out about these issues in due course.

Generally, we discover three types of creditors: These are those that
provided as a matter of course financial accommodation and by reason
thereof put in place mechanisms to mitigate their exposure to the debtor;
those that become creditors albeit they did not set out, or intend, ab
initio to extend credit; and those with no prior contact or relationship
with the company before transmogrifying into creditor of the company.4
However, statutorily creditor is restrictively defined as "the person
granting a facility on the back of a security interest."5 It is restrictive
because it is not every creditor that grants a facility against a security for
its repayment.

2 McKendrick E. (Ed), (infra) p. 621: credit is said to "denote financial accommodation of some kind
(like) the provision of a benefit (cash, land, goods, services or facilities) for which payment is to be
made by the request in money at a later date." Similarly, the UK Consumer Credit Act 1974 at section
9(1) credit is defined to include "a cash loan, and any other form of financial accommodation."
3 (2019) LPELR-49335 (CA)
4 Gullifer, L. and Payne, J. (2011), Corporate Finance Law: Principles and Policy. Hart Publishing
Oxford. p. 74
5 Section 63 Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017

                                                                                            23
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 explain the various ways by which the relationship of creditor
        and debtor is created

 explain the difference between, secured creditor and unsecured
        creditor.

1.3 Types of Creditors

1.3.1 Adaptive Creditors

These are persons that intentionally extend credit or financial
accommodation as a matter of course. This class of creditors are
similarly called adjusting creditors or voluntary creditors. They include
lenders (like deposit money banks, investment banks), investors and
other financiers. Since they voluntarily extend credit or grant financial
accommodation, it is expected that they will take steps to protect
themselves against the credit risks of the borrower (debtor). A creditor
that extends a credit facility and secures the repayment of the debt (loan)
with the assets or property of the debtor is said to be a secured creditor.
The debt is a secured debt. If the debtor or borrower falls into hard times
and becomes unable to pay, the secured creditor will have to be satisfied
first before consideration to other creditors of the company. This is
known as the principle of priority.6

1.3.2 Semi-Adaptive Creditors

They are those that deal with the debtor company and subsequently
become creditors without any intending to grant credit. The creditors
falling under this type include trade creditors and customers of goods or
services. They are quasi-adjusting. A case in point is where a contractor
delivers supplies to a company, which the latter holds off payment to a
later date without any prior understanding or agreement with the former.
In a contract of sale of goods, an unpaid seller can by contract reserve
title to the goods until payment is received from the buyer. In such a
case the general property in the goods will not pass to the buyer until
full payment.7 Furthermore, the recent introduction of a statutory regime
of personal property security in Nigeria, it is now possible to create
security interest in virtually every item of movable property, which
facilitates access to credit and promotes financial inclusion.8

6 For general reading on the principle of priority, see Beale, et al. (2012). The Law of Security and
Title-Based Financing, 2nd edition. London: Oxford University Press, Pages 451-555.
7 See section 19 Sale of Goods Act 1893
8 See section 1 Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017

24
CLL805  MODULE 2

1.3.3 Involuntary Creditors

The creditors in this class had no prior or previous contact with the
debtor company before becoming its creditor. The creditors of this class
are truly non-adjusting or involuntary. This is because they do not have
the privilege or opportunity to negotiate and thus adjust the terms by
which the debt is to be regulated. The creditor falling into group (like an
employee who is owed arrears of salary; a tort victim who secured
judgment for breach of duty of care in a negligence case against the
company; or a trader who set out to make supply on cash and carry basis
but ended up being owed all or part of the payment for the supplies) are
not placed in a position where they can adjust their bargain with the
company (like seeking a form of assurance of repayment by way of
security interest). Due to how the debt became owed, the creditor did not
extract any `security' which secures payment. In this case, the creditor
called an unsecured creditor.

                        SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7

  1) The process of taking funds from surplus economic units to
        deficit economic units is known as....

  2) Strictly speaking, financial accommodation is not the same thing as
       loan...

  3) Within the classification of creditors, a person or entity that come to
       be a creditor by reason of tort or judgment of the court is...

  4) Which enactment facilitates the creation of security in personal
       property in Nigeria?

  5) In line with Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act, ------
       grants financial accommodation on the back of a security interest.

  6) By the authority of UBA plc v Amsata Supersandals Manufacturing
        Company Ltd & Ors (2019) there is a world of difference between ------
       ------ and -------------------

  7) In your own words, who is a tort creditor?
  8) Discover and provide an instance of a quasi-adjusting creditor.

1.4

1.5 Summary

We have seen that there are basically two types of creditors ­ secured
creditors and unsecured creditors. Secured creditors are those types of
creditors who can extract a security as an assurance that the loan will be
repaid, while unsecured creditors do not have such protection. Later in
the course, you shall understand the legal position of both types of
creditors and appreciate the advantages one type has over the other.

        25
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

1.6 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Beale, H., Bridge, M., Gullifer, L. and Lomnicka, E. (2012). The Law of
        Security and Title-Based Financing, Second edition. London:
        Oxford University Press.

Gullifer, L. and Payne, J. (2011). Corporate Finance Law: Principles and
        Policy, Oxford: Hart Publishing.

McKendrick, E. (Ed). (2010). Goode on Commercial Law, Fourth
        Edition. London: Penguin Books.

Sale of Goods Act 1893.

Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017.

26
CLL805                                              MODULE 2

1.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise 7

1) Financial intermediation
2) False
3) A non-adjusting creditor.
4) Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017.
5) A creditor
6) A credit facility and line of credit.
7) A tort creditor is a tort victim who secured judgment for breach

       of duty of care in a negligence case against the company.
8) An instance of a quasi-adjusting creditor is where a contractor

       delivers supplies to a company, which the latter holds off
       payment to a later date without any prior understanding or
       agreement with the former.

                                                    27
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 2 DEBT FINANCING OPTIONS

Unit Structure

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
2.3 Debt Financing Options

        2.3.1 Loan Capital
        2.3.2 Debt Security
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
2.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction

Debt financing options deal with the avenues available to a company for
raising capital or accessing finance to support its operations. Generally,
we have short term financing, which include trade credit and borrowings
from microfinance entities that normally do not exceed a term of three
months, overdraft facilities with normally tenor of six months to one
year; intermediate financing, which extends to a term beyond one year;9
and long-term financing, which includes debentures. The debt financing
structure of a company is informed by many factors like the nature of its
activities, its size and its need or purpose for finance. There are two
categories of debt financing, namely loan capital and debt security.

2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the unit, you will be able to:

a) identify the different options by which companies finance their
        operations

b) differentiate between loan capital and debt security.

2.3 Debt Financing Options

2.3.1 Loan Capital

Generally, a loan is a contract and has been defined as an agreement by
which one party ("the lender") agrees to pay money to another ("the
borrower"), or to a third party at the borrower's request, on terms that the
borrower will repay the money together with any agreed interest. For the
agreement to constitute a loan, the payment must be made with a view to

9 A good example is a line of credit normally extended to a customer by the bank.

28
CLL805  MODULE 2

giving the borrower financial accommodation.10 Loan is a payment of
money to the debtor, or to a third part at the debtor's request, by way of
financial accommodation upon terms that the sum advanced, with any
stipulated interest, is to be repaid by the debtor in due course.11 From
this definition, a loan is always (a) an obligation (b) in money's worth
and (c) due from the debtor to the creditor. Is there any difference
between a debt and a loan?

Comparatively, a debt does not lend itself to the above characteristics of
a loan. A debt is the sum or totality of all claims against a person. In
other words, a debt can be money or otherwise than money.12 For
example, a promise to marry is a debt owed by the promisor to the
promisee. From time-to-time argument or misunderstanding may arise
between the banker and the customer on the loan contract. In the case of
Okehia & Anor v. Mortgage Bank (Nig) Ltd & Anor13 the Court of
Appeal gave us a guide on how to approach the issue. Apart from
deposit taking, money lending (loan) is another core aspect of financial
intermediation. Bank loans take various forms or types and only a few
can be discussed here:

1) Term loan. This requires to lender to make an advance to the
        borrower for a term, which can have varying maturity periods or
        tenor. Usually, it can range from short term (like one year),
        medium term (up to five years) or long term (up to ten or more
        years). The packaging of a term loan involves greater
        documentation.14 The loan agreement will make provisions for
        critical details including but not limited to the principal amount,
        interest rate, events of default, security (if any), whether the
        repayment is by amortisation or bullet.15 The loan may be
        syndicated, that is arranged by a group of lenders.

2) Revolving loan. With the line of credit (as it is also called), the
        banker (lender) makes available to the customer (borrower) a
        maximum amount of capital over and above the amount standing
        to its credit over a specified period of time. Because it is a line of
        credit, the borrower is allowed to repay, and re-draw, the loans
        granted to it out of the amount: provided that the overall limit of
        the facility cannot be exceeded. In Midatlantic National Bank v

10 FCMB Plc v. Benbok Ltd (2014) LPELR-23505 (CA)
11 McKendrick, E., (Ed). (2010). Goode on Commercial Law, 4th edition. Penguin Books, Lonodon. p.
621
12 Ekaete v. UBN plc (2014) LPELR-23111(CA)
13 (2018) LPELR-46263(CA)
14 On creation of a loan contract, see Ekong v. Ishie Community Bank (Nig) Ltd & Anor (2014) LPELR-
22961(CA).
15 Repayment by amortisation is where the loan is repaid on instalment basis; while bullet
repayment means the facility is repaid once and in full at the end of the facility.

                                                                                            29
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

        Commonwealth Gen. Ltd16 the US Florida District Court of
        Appeal held that the bank was not obligated to loan up to the
        limit of the credit line.

3) Overdraft loan. A loan by overdraft can be granted expressly or
        by implication. As to the former there is an express agreement
        between the lender and borrower on the application of the
        customer (debtor). As to the latter, the court stated in Maimasa
        Farms Ltd v. Mainstreet Bank Ltd that "the law is well settled
        that where a customer draws a cheque for a sum in excess of the
        amount standing to the credit of his current account, this is
        nothing but a request for a loan, and if the cheque is honoured,
        the customer is regarded as having borrowed the money by way
        of overdraft from the Bank."17 Since overdraft arises expressly or
        impliedly, it is no moment to suppose that the absence of a formal
        offer letter negates its existence: Obichi Investment &
        Management Consultant Ltd v. Oluchukwu Micro Finance
        Bank.18 Generally, the overdraft is repayable either on demand or
        on notice given or upon any other condition agreed upon by the
        parties.19 As to when the cause of action on an overdraft arises,
        the court held that a cause of action for the recovery of simple
        debt accrues only if demands for the repayment have been made
        and the debtor refuses to pay or upon any other condition agreed
        upon by the parties. However, the due date must have elapsed
        except there is infraction of performance by the debtor.20 In other
        words, overdraft, being in the nature of a simple debt, is
        repayable on demand or in line with the express conditions for
        repayment.

2.3.2 Debt Security

A debt is liability on a claim, a specific sum of money due by agreement
or otherwise. It is the aggregate of all existing claims against a person,
entity, or State, a non-monetary thing that one person owes another,
such as goods or services.21 On the other hand, the statutory definition of
security provides that it includes debentures, stocks or bonds issued or
proposed to be issued by a government; debentures, stocks, shares,
bonds or notes issued or proposed to be issued by a body corporate; any
right or option in respect of any such debentures, stocks, shares, bonds
or notes; or commodities futures, contracts, options and other
derivatives, and the term securities... includes those securities in the

16 (1980) 386 So So.2d 31, 33
17 (2015) LPELR-40875(CA); also see, NDIC v. Rabo Farms Ltd & Anor (2016) LPELR-42032(CA)
18 (2018) LPELR-44204(CA)
19 Standard Manufacturing Co. Ltd & Anor v. Sterling Bank Plc (2015) LPELR-24741(CA)
20 Angyu v. Malami [1992] 9 NWLR (PT. 264) 242; Ishola v. S.G.B. [1997] 2 SCNJ 1
21 Ekaete v UBN plc (supra)

30
CLL805  MODULE 2

category of the securities listed ... which may be transferred by means
of any electronic mode approved by the Commission22 and which may
be deposited, kept or stored with any licensed depository or custodian
company.23

However, our focus is with debenture as a form of debt security. It has
been inelegantly defined as "a debt owed by a company to another
secured by a deed which prescribes the condition of the realization of
the debt. A debenture may be created over the fixed or floating assets of
the company."24 Can you think of a better definition? A preferred
definition is that it is a document which either creates a debt or
acknowledges it.25 It may or may not be secured by charge or security
over the assets of the company.26 In other words, debenture can be
unsecured, otherwise called `naked debentures'.27 Under Companies and
Allied Matters Act (hereafter CAMA), it is possible to create various
types of debentures,28 and the power of a company to borrow
independent of any provision in the memorandum appear settled under
CAMA.29

                       SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8

1) What would be an apt authority for holding that commodities future,
    contracts and other derivatives fall within the definitional particulars of
    security?

2) An instrument, the purport of which is the acknowledgement of an
    indebtedness, whether supported by security over the assets of the issuer
    not, can rightly be called----

3) On the authority of --------- the ------- is repayable either on demand or on
    notice given or upon any other condition agreed upon by the parties.

4) An obligation in money's worth due from one party to another party is
    called---

5) Debenture is mostly backed by security. However, pursuant to --------- it is
    possible to have what is otherwise called ----------.

6) YC Ltd applied to ABC Bank for a loan. The Bank asked for the company's
    memorandum of association, which did not provide for the powers of the
    company to borrow money. In the absence of such borrowing power in the
    memorandum, will it be safe for the Bank to proceed and grant the
    facility? Give authority for your answer.

22 The Commission refers to the Securities and Exchange Commission established pursuant to
section 1(1) Investments and Securities Act (ISA) 2007
23 Section 315 ISA 2007
24 Brewtech Nig. Ltd V. Akinnawo & Anor (2016) LPELR-40094(CA)
25 Levy v Abercoriss Slate and Slab Co (1887) Ch D 260
26 Sealy L. and Worthington S. (2010). Sealy's Cases and Materials in Company Law, 9th ed, Oxford:
OUP p. 556
27 Sections 198(1) and 205(3) CAMA 2020
28 See sections 196, 197, and 198 CAMA 2020
29 Section 191 CAMA 2020

                                                                                            31
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

            2.4 Summary

             Generally, debt financing options have to do with the various ways by
             which the company finance its operations. We have two major ways:
             loan capital and debt security. Debt is distinguished from loan. While
             loan is always an obligation in money's worth, debt is a claim which
             may or may not be monetary. Three major types of loan capital are term
             loan, revolving loan (or credit line) and overdraft. A good example of
             debt security is the debenture. The debenture is an instrument
             acknowledging indebtedness and may or may not be secured.
             Discussions on debenture as a form of debt security will be treated in
             greater detail later in the Course.

            2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

             Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020.

             Investments and Securities Act 2007.

             2.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise 8

1) Section 315 Investments and Securities Act 2007
2) Debenture
3) Standard Manufacturing Co Ltd & v Sterling Bank Plc (2015);

        Overdraft.
4) A loan
5) Sections 173(1) and 180(3) CAMA; it is called "naked

        debentures"
6) Yes, it will be safe for the bank to extend the facility and not

        deny solely on the basis of absence of the power in the
        memorandum. By section 166 CAMA, every company has
        power to borrow and the failure of the memorandum to
        specifically provide for such powers did not override the law.

32
CLL805  MODULE 2

Unit 3 The Concept of Security

Unit Structure

4.1 Introduction
4.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
4.3 The Concept of Security

        4.3.1 Definition and Categories of Security
4.4 Summary
4.5 References for Further Reading
4.6 Possible Self-Assessment Exercises

4.1 Introduction

One of the processes involved in the grant or advancement of financial
accommodation is the offer letter by the bank which usually contains
conditions precedent as well as subsequent, which the proposed
borrower must meet. On satisfying the conditions precedent, the parties
(lender and borrower) proceed to enter into a formal loan agreement.
The loan agreement will contain conditions, otherwise known as
covenants. The debt covenants embodied in the loan agreement
constitute the first line of defence for the lender. The covenants are
principally of three types; these are affirmative covenants30, negative
covenants31 and termination and acceleration rights.32

They are self-help mechanisms. You must bear in mind that the essence
of a creditor entering a debt contract including extracting security
interest from the debtor is, among others, to insulate itself33 from the
credit risk of the debtor. Credit risk relates to the possibility of the
borrower defaulting in its obligations.34 If the facility is not supported by
security the loan agreement as the lender puts the lender to the funds
while the borrower is expected to meet and continue to perform its
obligations under the agreement.35 If a loan facility is additionally
supported by security, it means that the creditor will acquire security
interest in respect of the property and assets of the debtor.

30 An example of affirmative covenant is `right to information.'
31 Examples of negative covenant include `negative pledge clause' and `restriction on disposition of
assets.'
32 Termination and acceleration rights will provide such things events of default, cross default
provisions, etc.
33 "Itself" is intentionally used to refer to a corporate creditor, like a bank.
34 The risks include asset withdrawal, claim dilution, underinvestment and asset substitution.
35 For an in-depth reading on debt covenants constituted in a loan agreement, see Onamson, F.O.
(2017) Law of Creditor Protection in Nigeria. Lagos: Malthouse Law Books, pp. 82-104; Smith, C.W.,
and Warner, J.B., "On Financial Contracting: An Analysis of Bond Covenants" (1979) Journal of
Financial Economics 7, 117; Whitehead, C.K., "The Evolution of Debt Covenants, the Credit Market and
Corporate Governance" (2009) The Journal of Corporation Law 34(3), 641.

                                                                                            33
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

4.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

At the end of this Unit, you will be able to:

 define security
 diffrentiate and explain the two main categories of security
 explain the reasons why creditors insist on taking security.

4.3 The Concept of Security

3.3.1 Definition and Categories of Security

Security can be seen in different senses. It can be seen as interest or right
which the creditor acquires in the asset or property of the debtor. It can
mean the instrument itself that creates the interest which the debtor
granted to the creditor. For example, the instrument of charge or
debenture can be called a security in this sense. Finally, security can
take the form of the asset or property itself in which the creditor acquires
an interest of a proprietary character. For instance, where A furnishes
his house as security for repayment of a loan. The house furnished is the
security. Thus, security interest is not the same as proprietary right.

Security may be classified into direct/collateral security. The
classification or categorisation does not change the character of a
security, but merely attuned to enhancing our understanding of the
subject of security.

1) Direct Security

Direct security is the same as in rem or real security.36 Real security is
granted to the creditor, and it is this grant that makes him a secured
creditor. The grant gives the creditor security interest which is
effectively subrogates the creditor into the proprietary position of the
owner of the property. Before the advent of personal property security
regime in Nigeria, a difference is usually drawn between real security
and quasi-security.37 While real security is created by grant of rights to
the creditor, quasi security is created by reservation of title to the goods.
An example of the latter is an asset subject to a lease finance, the general
property in which is retained by the financier (creditor) while the special
property by way of possession is given to the debtor. Under the regime
of STMA, thought to implement a unitary security regime, it seems

36 For an in depth reading on the concept of personal property and associated rights thereto, see
McKendrick (ed), n. 60 above, pp. 27-67. For a reading on "taxonomy of assets subject to security."
37 See STMA 2017

34
CLL805  MODULE 2

functionally equivalent security devices created by reservation of title
still retain their quasi-security character.38

2) Collateral Security

Unlike real security, this is also known as in personam security or
personal security. This is a contract by a third party wherein the third
party undertakes to perform the obligation of the debtor. Examples of
collateral security include a guarantee and indemnity. Usually, the third
party is not a party to the principal agreement. Hence, the contract
embodying the collateral security is distinct and different from the
principal loan agreement.39

3.3.2 Justifications for Security

Apart from the various reasons advanced as to why banks pursue the
taking of security with evangelical or apostolic zeal, Gilmore asked,
does it (in the event of the debtor's insolvency or bankruptcy) make any
sense to award everything to a secured creditor who idly stood by while
a doomed enterprise goes down the slippery slope into bankruptcy?40
That is, granted the reasons for the taking of security which include that
it is a statutory requirement, it affords a powerful collection leverage
and it gives the lender a measure of control, there are. should be,
justifications why the law supports the institution of security. What
other reasons do you think account for the taking of security?41 The
following points are some of the justifications for security:

1) Security is justified because everyone is presumed to know the
        law. What is the jurisprudential perspective to this point? The
        jurisprudence that ignorance of the law is not an excuse appears
        to be at play here. Yet, the truth of this jurisprudence in the area
        of security has been disputed. People do not know the law, albeit,
        as Lindgren asserts, "we pretend mainly (knowledge of the law)
        because we think that we couldn't run a legal system without this
        pretence. If we could enforce only laws that people knew, the law
        would become totally subjective. Each person would be subject
        only to those laws that were in the head."42 Assuming the
        "ignorance of the law" principle does not operate, what would be

38 See sections 32 and 39(2) STMA 2017
39 For detailed reading on collateral security, see Andrews, G., and Millett, R., Law of Guarantees, 6th
edition, London: Sweet & Maxwell (2011)
40 Gilmore, G., "The Good Faith Purchase Idea and the Uniform Commercial Code: Confessions of a
Repentant Draftsman" (1981) Georgia Law Review 13, 605, p. 627
41 McCormack, G., Secured Credit under English and American Law, Cambridge: CUP (2004), p. 4
42 Lindgren, J., "The Lawyer's Fallacy ­ Chicago-Kent Dedication Symposium: Topics in
Jurisprudence" (1992) Chicago-Kent Law Review 68:109, p. 112

                                                                                            35
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

        the implication for Nigeria with over 200 million?43 The courts
        support the knowledge of the law perspective when it was held
        that any person "dealing with a company knows also its powers
        of borrowing and that the company has power to pledge every
        part of the company."44 In other words, it is a case of caveat
        emptor for creditors.

2) Security is justified based on the theory of freedom of contract or
        bargain theory. This justification is consistent with "traditional
        English legal and judicial thinking,"45 which allows the parties to
        a contract to enter agreements and arrangements according to
        their prompting subject only that such contracts do not offend the
        doctrine of sham or the principle of mislabelling. As far as
        security transaction is concerned, the courts will not restrict the
        contractual freedom of the parties.46

3) A justification for security holds that promotes economic activity,
        apart from the fact that it aligns with the theory of property rights.
        While the latter is related to the freedom of contract theory, the
        former appeals to the Justinian position in the Corpus Iuris
        Civilis47 that "a security is given for the benefit of both parties: of
        the debtor in that he can borrow more readily, and of the creditor
        in that his loan is safer."48 Hence, the activities of both parties are
        thereby enhanced and promoted: for the debtor his going concern
        situation is supported and sustained; and for the creditor the profit
        element and return on investment for the shareholders become
        reinforced.

43 It means that we will have different legal systems depending on the population, since it is the law
known to an individual that is, or will be, applicable to that person. In the end, no law will be
enforced at all.
44 Re General South America Co (1876) 2 ChD 337
45 McCormack, n. 88 above, p. 12
46 Re Brightlife Ltd (1987) Ch 200
47 Justiniani Institutiones 3,14,4: Cited in Kieninger, E. (Ed), Security Rights in Movable Property in
European Private Law, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press (2004) p. 7
48 Represented in the expression, "pignus utriusque gratia datur, et debitoris, quo magis ei pecunia
crederetur, et creditoris, quo magius ei in tuto sit creditum."

36
CLL805  MODULE 2

                              SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 9
     1) What is the Justinian perspective with respect to the justification of security?
     2) A credit relationship or arrangement whereby the creditor retains the general

          property before the advent of STMA is called------
     3) Of the major types of covenants in a debt contract ------- restricts the capacity of

          the debtor to deal with its business according to its prompting.
     4) ----- is a self-help mechanism which the creditor can use to protect itself.
     5) The deed of mortgage created by a mortgagor can be properly called-------.
     6) The possibility or likelihood of the debtor not being able, and thus failing, to meet

          its obligations under the credit relationship is called --------

4.4 Summary

In this Unit you have been taken through three concepts ­ definition of
security, categories of security and justification of security. Concerning
a definition of security, you saw the different senses in which security
can be or has been construed. As regards categories of security, these are
principally two ­ real security and collateral security. While real security
is usually granted by the debtor, collateral security is granted by a third
party. In respect of justification of security, the reasons for the taking of
security call for the need to find justifications for it. Some of the
justifications include the theory of property rights, promotion of
economic activity, freedom of contract and the presumption of
knowledge of the law.

4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Andrews, G., & Millett, R. (2011). Law of Guarantees, 6th edition,
        London: Sweet & Maxwell.

Gilmore, G. (1981). "The Good Faith Purchase Idea and the Uniform
        Commercial Code: Confessions of a Repentant Draftsman"
        Georgia Law Review 13, 605.

Kieninger, E. (Ed). (2004). Security Rights in Movable Property in
        European Private Law, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Lindgren, J. (1992). "The Lawyer's Fallacy ­ Chicago-Kent Dedication
        Symposium: Topics in Jurisprudence" Chicago-Kent Law
        Review 68:109.

        37
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Onamson, F.O. (2017). Law of Creditor Protection in Nigeria. Lagos:
        Malthouse Law Books.

Smith, C.W., and Warner, J.B. (1979. "On Financial Contracting: An
        Analysis of Bond Covenants" Journal of Financial Economics 7,
        117.

Whitehead, C.K. (2009). "The Evolution of Debt Covenants, the Credit
        Market and Corporate Governance" The Journal of Corporation
        Law 34(3), 641.

4.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 9

    1) The Justinian perspective holds that security is mutually
            beneficial to the creditor and the debtor.

    2) Quasi-security
    3) Negative covenants
    4) A loan agreement or debt contract
    5) A security
    6) Credit risk

38
CLL805                                              MODULE 2

Unit 4  Types of Assets Amenable to Security Interest49

Unit Structure

4.1 Introduction
4.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
4.3 Types of Assets Amenable to Security Intterest

         4.3.1 Real and Personal Property
         4.3.2 Tangible and Intangible Assets
         4.3.3 Real and Ciirculating Assets
         4.3.4 Present and Future Assets
4.4 Summary
4.5 References for Further Reading
4.6 Possible Self-Assessment Exercises

4.1 Introduction

One of the keys to understanding the nature of security interest is to
appreciate the assets which the debtor can offer to the creditor to secure
the repayment of the financial accommodation. This is because the
subject of every security is the asset or property of the borrower (debtor)
made available to the lender (creditor). If the debtor defaults, an event of
default is said to occur. In such a case several options are open to
creditor, one of which is to realise the property and repay the debtor. An
understanding of the various types of assets will enable the prospective
debtor to make up its mind as to whether to proceed with the loan
transaction and if so which of its property or assets it is prepared to
make available to the credit as security for repayment of the loan.

4.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

At the end of this Unit, you will be able to identify and discuss the
various types of assets which can be put forward by the debtor as
security for repayment of a debt, otherwise called loan.

4.3 Types of Assets Amenable to Security Interest

4.3.1 Real and Personal Property

Real property is land, or interests in land. Land is generally seen as a
safe asset, so creditors are more at home with in the creation of security

49 Most of the discussions here will be found in Onamson, F.O. (2017). Law and Creditor Protection
in Nigeria. Malthouse Law Books, Lagos, pp. 53-56.

                                                                                            39
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

interest. In Nigeria culture land is high valued and this is exemplified by
the fact that the individual occupier of any land cannot sell, assign, or in
any way alienate his possessory title without the consent of the family
head, whose position is analogous to that of a trustee. In fact, individual
ownership of land was said to be foreign to native ideas and was the
collateral result of the introduction of English ideas.50 The Land Use Act
completely altered the communal land holding structure in Nigeria.
Personal property are every other species of property. Characteristically,
personal property are movable. They include motor vehicles,
jewelleries, books, etc. The legal regime of secured transactions
affecting personal property in Nigeria changed with the enactment of the
Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017 (STMA 2017).
Ozekhome points out that:

     Before 2017 the closest Nigeria came to having a legal framework on
     personal property was the Bill of Sale Act 1882, which is a statute of
     general application that provided for chattel mortgage. However,
     chattel mortgage did not see the light of day in Nigeria as there was no
     bill of sale register, which is a prerequisite of chattel mortgage. In
     place of chattel mortgage, retained title financing devices, such as
     conditional sale, hire purchase and financial leases, thrived.

Further discussions on secured transactions involving the use personal
property are fully treated in Module 5 of this Course.

4.3.2 Tangible and Intangible Assets

Tangible assets cover choses in possession. They are tangible because
they are physical and have a corporeal existence. Tangible assets will
include land, equipment, furniture, fittings and fixtures, raw materials,
inventory. The most significant point about tangible assets is that they
can be possessed. It is not necessary that there must be a nexus between
who has possession and who has security interest in those assets. In the
absence of other evidence, possession can be evidence of title.51

Intangible assets, known choses in action, are assets which are not
capable of possession and form a residual category of assets after
reckoning with tangible assets. Intangible assets constitute rights against
a specific person. The right to sue a person for a debt is a good example.
Other examples include trademarks, patents and copyright. For this type
of property, there is clearly no problem about a split between who has
possession and who has proprietary rights.52 Can you think of any types

50 Per Viscount Haldane in Amodu TIjani v Secretary, Southern Nigeria (supra)
51 See sections 35 and 143 Evidence Acct 2011; Graham & Ors v Esumai & Ors (1984) 11 SC 123.
52 Gullifer, L. and Payne, J. (2011). Corporate Finance Law: Princples and Policy. Hart, Oxford. p.223

40
CLL805  MODULE 2

of intangible assets? We can discover two main types, namely "pure
intangibles" and "documentary intangibles".53

A pure intangible is a right which is not, legally, represented by a
document. It is incapable of being dealt with by way of pledge, but only
by way of assignment or charge. Documentary intangibles are capable
of being dealt with by way of a pledge. There are three kinds54 namely
documents of title to payment of money (such as, bills of exchange,
promissory notes, cheques, banker's drafts; documents of title to
negotiable securities, such as bearer bonds, share warrants, debentures
and notes; and documents of title to goods, like bill of lading. The main
feature of documentary intangible is that the debt is locked up in the
document. Since the rights are located in a document much of the law
governing tangible property will apply to that document because they
become transferable by transfer of that document.

4.3.3 Fixed and Circulating Assets

Fixed assets are not subject to disposal in the ordinary course of
business of the company while circulating assets change from time to
time. Fixed assets include buildings, motor vehicles, furniture, plant and
machinery. Circulating assets include inventory or stock, raw materials
and book debts (receivables). Taking the point further, fixed assets will
be subject to fixed charges while circulating assets will be amenable to
floating charges. However, this simple classification does not hold in
practice, because this dichotomy appears to have been lost as creditors
attempt to take fixed charge security interests over assets that
traditionally been subject to fixed charges, with the result that distinction
between fixed and floating charges are construed based on parameter
other than the nature of assets.55

4.3.4 Present and Future Assets

Present and future assets relate to assets over which floating charges can
be granted by the debtor in favour of its creditor. This description will
limit present and future assets to those assets over which only floating
charges can be created. Who can create a charge? What is a floating
charge as against a fixed charge? Only a company can create a charge,
floating or fixed. While the subject of charges generally will be
discussed in the second semester of this Course, we can briefly state the

53 McKendrick (Ed) op cit, p. 51
54 But see Gullifer (Ed), op cit, p. 32, where it is contended that the class of what constitutes
documentary intangible is not closed and is liable to expansion through mercantile usage.
55 See Re Yorkshire Woolcombers (1903) 2 Ch. 284; Re Bullas Trading (infra); Agnew v IRC (infra)

                                                                                            41
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

differences. Floating charge is an equitable charge over the whole or a
specified part of the company's undertakings and assets including
present and future assets. The chargor is free to deal and meddle with
the assets, including to take them away from the ambit of the security
until a crystalising events occurs that causes the floating charge to
attach. On the other hand, fixed charge is a security interest that attaches
immediately it is created as the assets subject to the charge are
permanently appropriated to the payment of the debt thereby secured.
The debtor is deprived of the capacity to use the assets.

In this sense too, present and future assets will mean assets which
continuously flow in and out in the life of the company as a going
concern and constitute the fund of assets subject to floating charge so
that such security is one that is ambulatory and hovering over and
floating with that class of circulatory property (present and future) until
it fixes subject to occurrence of one or more crystallisation events.56

                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 9

1) List any three types of documentary intangibles?
2) Different between fixed assets and circulating assets by description.
3) Mr. Boss approached Freedom Bank Limited for a loan to buy a car and

    take a second wife. He offered to give the bank floating charge over his
    personal assets. Advise the bank.

4.4 Summary

In this Unit, you have been exposed to the various types of assetss which
the debtor can make available to the creditor as security for a loan.

4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Onamson, F.O. (2017). Law of Creditor Protection in Nigeria. Lagos:
        Malthouse Law Books.

4.6 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 9

       1) Documents of title to payment of money (bill of exchange); documents of
             title to negotiable securities (share warrants0; and documents of title to goods

       2) Fixed assets include buildings, motor vehicles, furniture, plant and
             machinery. Circulating assets include inventory or stock, raw materials and
             book debts (receivables).

       3) Only a company can create a security interest by way of a charge. Therefore,
             Mr. Boss would fail in his offer to grant security interest by way of floating
             charge to the bank.

56 Illingworth v Holdsworth (1904) AC 355

42
CLL805  MODULE 3

MODULE 3 THE NATURE OF SECURITY INTEREST

Unit 1 How to Identify Security Interest

Unit Structure

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 The Distinctive Properties of Security Interest

        1.3.1 Security and other Transactional Transactions
        1.3.2 Proprietary Right and Security Interest
        1.3.3 Indicia of Security Interest
1.4 Characteristics or Traits of Security Interest
        1.4.1 Security Rights as Rights in rem
        1.4.2 The Avenues for Grant of Security to be Unrestrained
        1.4.3 Security Interest Widest Disclosure
        1.4.4 Costs Not to Fetter the Creation of Security Right
1.5 Summary
1.6 References/Further Reading/Web Sources
1.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction

Security interest where validly created subrogates the creditor into the
proprietary position of the debtor with reference to the assets subject to
security. Generally, security interest sets up a peculiar position where, in
the event of the debtor falling into trouble and being unable to pay its
debts, the secured creditor becomes placed in a privileged position as
against the unsecured creditors who must wait to scoop from whatever, if
any, is left after the claims of the former has been satisfied. An
understanding of the nature of security interest, which will focus on the
categorised topics of indicia of security interest and numerus clausus of
security interest, will set the proper background for your efficient grasp
of the course. It is not unusual to hear or speak of proprietary right or
interest as against security interest. As you shall see shortly, although
interrelated, the two terms are not the same. In order to neatly draw the
line between security interest as against proprietary right, the court
developed what is now known as the indicia of security interest.

1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 discuss the overall nature of security and security interest
 distinguish proprietary right from security interest.

                                                                                            41
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

 list the indicia of security interest as distinct from the
        characteristics of security.

1.3 The Principles of Security Interest

1.3.1 Security and Purchase Transaction

At this juncture it is important you bear in mind that security or security
interest where it is created cannot amount the same thing to other
transactional situations. Master Nigeria Limited is owed N100 million by
Shell Oil Producing Plc. It approaches Action Bank Limited for a loan on
the "security" of the amount owed to it by Shell Oil Producing Plc. The
Bank accepts and grants Master Nigeria Ltd a credit facility of N50
million. The N100 million owed to Master Nigeria Ltd is called
"receivables" and what it has done is to use the "receivables" to secure
the repayment of the N50 million credit facility extended to it by its
bankers, Action Bank Ltd. This is a security transaction. On the other
hand, where Master Nigeria Ltd approaches SME Bank Ltd to "purchase"
the receivable and the bank agrees, a different transaction has taken place.
For instance, let us assume that SME Bank Ltd has agreed to purchase the
N100 million receivable from Master Nigeria Ltd at N65 million. This is
a purchase transaction. As a purchase as against a security, Master Nigeria
Ltd has transferred outright its right on the receivable and as a result it no
longer has any "duty to repay and no right to redeem."1

1.3.2 Proprietary Right and Security Interest

Proprietary right is the bundle of rights exercisable by an owner in respect
of his property. The rights are made up of (a) ownership, and (b)
possession for a limited interest.2 Characteristically, such property rights
command universality (it can be asserted against the whole world),
exigibility (it can be exacted or enforced against a thing (like enjoyment
of it) and it curtailed when the thing ceases to exist), transferability, and
excludability (the right to stop others from enjoying or intervening in the
thing)3 exists and inures in the owner of the property. The foregoing
features constitute rights of ownership and incidents thereof.

When a company borrows money from a bank and uses its assets to secure
the repayment of the loan, it has in effect created security as against the
specific asset affected. In creating a security, the company (debtor), grants
the banker (creditor) security interest in respect of its asset(s). The effect
of creating security interest is that the debtor transfers its proprietary

1 Gullifer (Ed) p. 99.
2 Sealy, L.S., and Hooley, R.J.A., Commercial Law: Text, Cases, and Materials, 4th ed., Oxford: OUP
(2009), p. 64
3 Bridge, M., Personal Property Law, 4th ed., Oxford: OUP (2015), pp. 2-3

42
CLL805  MODULE 3

 rights to the creditor. Security interest is the proprietary right of the debtor
 in a thing granted and donated to the creditor to secure repayment of loan
 or discharge of an obligation. On the relationship between proprietary
 right and security interest, or as Ferran puts it, "the proprietary nature of
 security," it has been reiterated that:

 A right in security is a right over property given by a debtor to a
 creditor whereby the latter in the event of the debtor's failure
 acquires priority over the property against the general body of
 creditors of the debtor. It is of the essence of a right in security that
 the debtor possesses in relation to the property a right which he can
 transfer to the creditor, which right must be retransferred to him
 upon payment of the debt.4

1.3.3 Indicia of Security Interest

 Romer LJ propounded what has come to be known as "indicia of security
 interest"5 Absent them in any security transaction, it is not possible to
 grant proprietary right by way of security interest in the assets of the
 debtor. As shall be seen, it is submitted that they are dissimilar from
 features of security, albeit relationship can be established between the
 two. There are:

1) Once the debt is debt is discharged, the asset subject to the security
         must be released from the grip of the creditor. This means that
         security interest cannot attach except and only when the creditor
         has provided the credit or advanced the facilities. That is, without
         the accommodation, there will be no justification for maintaining
         the security.6

2) Where the creditor accelerates the debt and therefore takes
         immediate steps to realise the security for an amount less than the
         secured obligation, the creditor, as of right, can follow the debtor
         for the balance.

3) Inversely, where the amount realised is greater than the debtor's
         outstanding obligation under the loan following a realisation of the
         security, the creditor must account to the debtor for the surplus. On
         this, Kay J advised as to duty of the creditor on the surplus:

 I have paid my debt; this property, which is pledged to me, and
 in respect of which I now hold this surplus in my hand, is not my

4 Armour v Thyssen Edelstachwerke AG (1990) 3 All ER 481, HL, 486. Cited in Ferran, E., Principles of
Corporate Finance Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2008) p. 354
5 Re George Inglefield Ltd (1933) Ch 1
6 For example, see section 12(a) Bills of Sale Law

                                                                                            43
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

property. I desire to get rid of this surplus, and hand it back to
the person (the debtor) to whom it belongs.7

4) Security interest can only be created by grant and not by
        reservation of absolute interest.8 Examples financing structures
        involving the reservation of absolute interest include hire purchase,
        and finance lease transactions. The elitist STMA 2017 sought to
        create a regime of unitary security system, but it is doubtful if it
        has achieved this objective. Comparatively, the Malawian
        legislation9 on this appears to fare better. It effectively repealed all
        legislations that may leave anyone in doubt as to its purpose in this
        connection.10 The double-minded approach of the STMA is
        understandable, for being elitist, the Collateral Registry has no
        business with individuals but banks only.

1.4 Distinctive Traits of Security Interest

1.4.1 Security Rights as Rights in rem

As seen earlier, rights in rem is different from in personam rights. Rights
in rem are real rights that vest the characteristics of property rights on the
one who is the owner of the asset. Thus, security interest is an interest of
the creditor in the property owned by the debtor.11

1.4.2 The Avenues for Grant of Security to be Unrestrained

In other words, it should be possible for the debtor to grant security
interest "in the widest possible range of cases." In this sense there should
be no hurdles affecting the right of the debtor to create or grant security
interest in and over his assets, personal or real. In fact, the possibility must
extend to the present and future assets12 of the debtor "without any
additional formalities in the future,13 and to acquire a non-possessory
proprietary interest which does not prevent the borrower from disposing

7 Charles v Jones (1887) 35 Ch 544. In the case of Mainama v. Keystone Bank Ltd (2015) LPELR-
40877(CA), "a Mortgagee is not a trustee of a power of sale for the Mortgagor, except as to the
balance of the purchase price after the sale."
8 McEntire v Crossley Brothers Ltd (1895) AC 457.
9 Personal Property Security Act (PPSA) 2013
10 For example, section 123(1) PPSA 2013 not only repealed the Bills of Sale Act, it repealed the Hire
Purchase Act under which lease financing structures and conditional sale agreements are capable of
being created. In Nigeria, the Hire Purchase Act and the Bills of Sale Law of the various states, not
being repealed or amended under STMA 2017, still apply.
11 Ferran, E., Corporate Finance Law, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2008) p. 358.
12 While the Bills of Sale Law prohibits the grant of security interest in respect of future assets (after
acquired property), the STMA 2017, just like CAMA, provides for and permits the creation of security
in future assets.
13 See sections 3(2)(b) and 6(1)(b) providing for security interest in future assets and requires no
further action to attach

44
CLL805  MODULE 3

of the asset subject to that interest in the ordinary course of business."14
What would be the situation where the loan amount is increased, requiring
the enhancement of the security? Would the doing of anything in this
connection constitute "additional formalities"? 15

1.4.3 Security Interest Widest Disclosure

This simply means that there must be functional registry where, for the
purpose of security, the widest and unrestrained publicity and access to
the public should be maintained and enforced. In Nigeria there are many
registries in this regard. Examples include the Bills of Sale Registry in the
Directorate of Commercial Law of the Ministry of Justice Lagos State,
the National Collateral Registry (called the Collateral Registry)
established pursuant to the STMA.16 Why is the requirement of registry a
critical feature of security? This is because, among other reasons, it
attacks the "false wealth syndrome" birthed by the advent of non-
possessory security.

1.4.4 Costs Not to Fetter the Creation of Security Right

Consequently, cost of creating security right in property for the purpose
of repayment of debt must be fair and affordable.17 On this feature,
McCormack postulated that the cost is relatively at reasonable levels if
"there are no notarization fees or other levies payable on instruments of
charge registering a charge and searching the register."18 This position
can only be idealistic. This is because, especially in Nigeria, apart from
payment of the legal fees for the preparation of the instrument of security,
the debtor must proceed to pay filing fees and stamping fees. Where the
security relates to an interest in land, for example by way of deed of legal
mortgage, the applicant must additionally pay for "consent fee". Aside
from this payment, the system does not promote transparent treatment of
applications, so that parties are constrained "to facilitate" the processing
of their applications for registration of the instrument creating security.
However, it must be noted, with commendation, that the position in the
context of the Collateral Registry created under the STMA 2017 is
diametrically different. The filing is efficient and most likely cost
efficient. The drawback is that it is restricted to corporate entities.

14 Gullifer and Payne, p. 219
15 See sections 13 and 19 STMA 2017
16 The Charges Registry is maintained at the Corporate Affairs Commission and there are separate
registries for the purpose of ships and aircrafts in Nigeria.
17 The other feature of security is that the realization of the security for repayment of loan should be
cost effective and rapid. The latter feature is a problem and even under STMA 2017 it has not been
resolved satisfactorily.
18 McCormack, n. 88 above, p. 49

                                                                                            45
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

                       SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 10
1) Property rights are said to be made up of certain characteristics. Name them.
2) In simple terms, differentiate between propriate right and security interest.
3) What would be your apt authority for the development of indicia of security

    interest?
4) ABC Bank realised the security furnished by TEX Ltd for repayment of the

    loan of one million NGN. The property, which is the subject of security, was
    told at two million NGN. After reconciliation, it turned out that an excess of
    500,000 NGN was left. ABC Bank sought to retain this amount as its windfall.
    What do you think?
5) The features of property rights are said to constitute---------.
6) ------------- and ----------- are examples of a system of wide publicity for
    security.
7) What issues should agitate your mind with respect to the expectation that the
    cost of creating and maintaining a security right should be fair and
    affordable?
8) The STMA 2017 is elitist in its outlook and appeared to have failed to realise
    its aim of creating a unitary security interest regime. Give example of two
    pieces of legislation which survived the STMA 2017 when the reverse should
    have been the case?
9) The law is that a Mortgagee is not a trustee of a power of sale for the
    Mortgagor, except as to the balance of the purchase price after the sale. Cite
    an authority to support this.

1.5 Summary

In this Unit we considered three principal themes ­ proprietary right,
indicators of security interest and characteristics of security interest. We
were able to show the difference between proprietary right and security
interest. The indicia of security interest, four of them, propounded by
Romer LJ must be present. The characteristics of security help us to
appreciate the justifications of security interest as a form subrogated
proprietary right.
1.6 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

46
CLL805  MODULE 3

Bridge, M. (2015). Personal Property Law, 4th ed., Oxford: OUP .

Ferran, E. (2008). Corporate Finance Law, Oxford: Oxford University
        Press.

Gullifer L. and Payne, J. (2011). Corporate Finance Law: Principles and
        Practice. Oxford: Hart Publishing.

Sealy, L.S., and Hooley, R.J.A. (2009). Commercial Law: Text, Cases,
        and Materials, 4th ed., Oxford: OUP.

1.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 10

  1) Universality, transferability, exigibility and excludability
  2) Proprietary right is the right of the owner of a property to appropriate the

           rights and incidents of ownership including to assert against the world, to
           enjoy it and stop or prevent others from enjoying or intervening in his
           enjoyment and to dispose it by transfer, sale or assignment. Security
           interest is the proprietary right of the owner donated to the creditor in
           respect of the debtor's asset for the repayment of loan or debt.

  3) The authority would be the case of Re George Inglefield Ltd (1893)
  4) By the principles of indicia of security, where the amount realised is

           greater than the debtor's outstanding obligation under the loan following
           a realisation of the security, the creditor must account to the debtor for the
           surplus. Consequently, Tex Ltd is entitled to the surplus and if ABC Bank
           insists, Tex could sue to recover.

  5) Rights and incidents of ownership.
  6) Bills of Sale Register and Collateral Registry
. 7) The issues include but not limited to institutional impediments that drive

           up the costs and the requirement of consent under the LUA.
  8) They are the Hire Purchase Act and Bills of Sale Laws of the various

           States.
  9) Charles v Jones (1887) 35 Ch 544 OR Mainama v. Keystone Bank Ltd

           (2015) LPELR-40877(CA).

        47
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 2 NUMERUS CLAUSUS OF SECURITY
INTERESTS (Otherwise Form-based Security Interests)

Unit Structure

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
2.3 Numerus Clausus of Security of Interest

        2.3.1 Possessory Security
        2.3.3 Non-Possessory Security
2.4 How Form-bbased Security Interests Arise
        2.4.1 Attachment of Security
        2.4.2 Perfection
2.5 Summary
2.6 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
2.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction

Under the English legal system, the numerus clausus of security interest
are principally four ­ the pledge, lien, mortgage and charge. The numerus
clausus of security interests are generally classified into possessory and
non-possessory security interests.19 Otherwise called "form-based"20 or
formal security interests, the four types of security interest are collectively
called consensual security interest.21 With the passage of the unitary-
based functional personal property security legislation in 2017, the
numerus clausus of security interests in Nigeria have been expanded to
include situations which, hitherto, create are "functionally equivalent
security devices,"22 otherwise called "quasi-security interests."23
Notwithstanding, there is what is called attachment of security. This
involves identifying specifically at what point or stage can it be said that
security interest has bitten and thus attached on the assets of the debtor.

With respect to possessory and non-possessory security, you must note
the need to appreciate the importance of asset types. In other words,
certain asset types may be suitable for possessory security while others
may not. For example, tangible property is generally suitable for grant of

19 See section 8(2) STMA 2017 providing for possessory and non-possessory security interest.
20 Olekhov, I. (2002). Security Interests in Personal Property: the Perspectives of Harmonisation. IUS
Commune Research Propject. An Article on Property Law under the Ius Commune Research Project
of Ius Commue and Private Law Programme, Edingburgh. (Unpublished). Page 20. Available at
http://www.iuscommune.eu/html/prize/pdf/2002_Olekhov%20.pdf. Accessed 20/12/2022.
21 Davies, P.L. Gower and Davies' Principles of Modern Company Law, 7th ed, London: Sweet and
Maxwell (2003) p. 816
22 Sections 2(a) and 29 STMA 2017 specifically excluded set-off (or a right thereto), a process by which
a claim is counterbalanced, either in diminution or extinguishment, by reason of a cross claim.
23 Beale, H., Bridge, M., Gullifer, L., and Lomnicka, E., The Law of Security and Title-based Financing,
2nd ed, Oxford: Oxford University Press (2012) pp 235-302.

48
CLL805  MODULE 3

possessory or non-possessory security. This is as against pure intangibles,
not lending themselves to possession, are only amenable to non-
possessory security. This must be contrasted with pure documentary
intangibles,24 regarded as goods can be subject to possessory security.25
Generally, assets subject to security are classified into tangible and
intangible assets, real and personal property, fixed and circulating assets,
and present and future assets.

In the final analysis, the objective of security interest is to limit the
exposure of the creditor to the credit risk of the debtor and thus mitigate
the potential loss of the creditor in the event that the debtor falls into
financial troubles and becomes unable to meet its obligations under the
debt contract. Where this arises, the question of realisation arises. The
realisation of security presupposes that the security interest was perfected,
as otherwise the creditor is unsecured. Again, in attempting to realise the
security, the situation of the debtor becomes paramount. This has given
rise to what has been called pre-insolvency concerns or issues.

2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 describe the types of security interests capable of being created
        under our law

 appraise the importance of attachment of security interest as a
        basis for any claim by the secured creditor

 explain the idea of perfection of security and priorities.

2.3 Numerus Clausus of Security Interest

2.3.1 Common law (Form-based) Possessory Security
Interessts

Generally, the numerus clausus of security interests under common law
are the pledge and lien (possessory), mortgage and charge (non-
possessory).26 We call them, in this course, "formal security interests,"
because they are fully embeeded in formalism as against its function. The
unitary concept of security interest which became part of our legal system
following the enactment of the Secured Transactions in Movable Assets
Act 2017, brought about a security interest that plays down on the

24 There are three types of documentary intangibles, namely "documents of title to payment of
money (termed instruments), documents of title to negotiable securities (e.g. bearer bonds and
notes) and documents of title to goods (like bill of lading)": McKendrick (Ed), n. 50 above, p 52
25 Gullifer, L. (Ed) Goode on Legal Problems of Credit and Security, 4th ed London: Sweet and Maxwell
(2008) p. 6
26 See Module 4 for further treatment.

                                                                                            49
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

formalistic preoccupation of the common law numerus clauses of security
interests and favoured greatly a functional security interest that
emphasizes function as against form.27

These are the pledge and lien, arise in cases where the debtor transfers
actual or constructive possession of the asset subject to security to the
creditor. When possessory security is in operation, the debtor does not
have access to the security. Possessory security moves the asset from the
custody of the debtor to that of the creditor. This removes the possibility
of the debtor pretending that the assets are available and free of equities.
The presence of possessory security entitles the creditor to the right of
possession against the world, including the debtor and encumbrancing
third parties.

It is not expected that every security interest created by the debtor in
favour of the creditor over its assets will be possessory. This is because
such a scenario would make borrowing virtually impossible as the debtor
would, in the ordinary course of its business, be deprived of the ability to
use the assets subject to the security. Hence there was the need for a
system which makes it possible for the debtor to obtain finance for its
business, create security in respect of its assets and still have the benefit
of using the assets. Non-possessory, which seems to give the debtor the
best of two worlds, opens access to credit for the debtor and still permit
the debtor to retain its assets for its business. Gullifer (Ed) observed that
cases arise which allow "a possessory security to be converted into a non-
possessory security":

For example, where documents of title pledged to a bank are released
to the pledgor to enable the goods to be sold and a sale takes place,
the proceeds become subject to an equitable charge.28 Similarly(,) if
a pledgee in possession of bearer securities has them converted into
registered securities, he becomes a mortgagee or charge.29

2.3.2 Common law (Form-bassed) Non-poossessory Security
Interests

The presence of non-possessory security allows the debtor to continue to
trade with its assets. The regime of non-possessory security was
facilitated by industrialization and relaxation of the prohibition of interest.
It was said to be greeted with doubt because opportunism and
misbehaviour may be facilitated thereby. In other words, the debtor
retaining and remaining "in possession of the security may lead to fraud

27 See Module 5 for further discussion of Functional Security Interest in the context of the
Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017..
28 Section 7(1) STMA 2017 captures this position exactly.
29 Gullifer (Ed), pp. 6-7

50
CLL805  MODULE 3

on unsuspecting potential lenders" that may extend credit unknowingly
that the asset furnished as security has been encumbered.30 Possessory
security is said to create ostensible or false-wealth problem because:
Right thinking people seem always to have felt that there was something
vaguely dishonourable, if not outright dishonest, about transactions in
which a loan is secured by a debtor's personal property ­ particularly
about transactions in which the debtor is allowed to remain in possession
of the property and to enjoy its full use during the loan period.31

Despite the initial hostility towards, and distrust of, non-possessory
security, it has helped us to sidestep the failings of possessory security.
Today, when credit is said to be the engine of economic activity, it is
always in reference to non-possessory security. The STMA is not averse
to possessory as well as non-possessory security32 having crystallised
them into what we call, in this course, "functional security interest."33

2.4 How Common Form-based Security Interests Arise

2.4.1 Attachment of Security

This refers to the `fastening' of the interest created in the asset. Once the
interest has fastened the creditor's security interest becomes a matter of
law. McKendrick outlines six conditions, otherwise called the ingredients
of attachment, that must coexist and be present before the interest of the
creditor can attach:34

a) There must an agreement for security. The agreement
        must conform to the statutory requirements or
        formalities.35

b) The asset to be given in security must be identifiable.36
c) The debtor must have an interest in the asset or a

        power to give it in security.37
d) There must be some current obligation of debtor to

        creditor which the asset is designed to secure.
e) Any contractual conditions for attachment must have

        been fulfilled.

30 Nwogu, T.O., Secured Transactions Law of Nigeria and Cameroun through the Lens of Article 9 of
the Uniform Commercial Code of the United States of America (Doctoral Thesis) Department of Legal
Studies, Central European University, Budapest (2011), n. 90, p. 36
31 Gilmore, G., "Security Law, Formalism and Article 9" (1968) Nebraska Law Review 47(4):659
Available online at http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/nlr/vol47/iss4/3. Accessed 23/1/2020
32 Section 8(2) STMA 2017
33 See Module 5 for further discussion.
34 McKendrick (Ed), p. 670; Gullifer (Ed), (2012). Goode on Legal Problems of Credit and Security.
Fourth edition. London: Sweet & Maxwell.
35 For a similar under the unitary or functional security system, see sections 3 and 5 STMA 2017
36 Ibid, section 6
37 Ibid, section 4

                                                                                            51
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

f) In the case of pledge, actual or constructive possession
        must be given to the creditor.

Noting that the ingredients must co-exist and be present at the same time,
Gulifer (Ed) observed that attachment ceases and the security interest
becomes inchoate, reviving ab initio as soon as the missing element is
once more supplied."

Can you attempt comparing attachment of security under the traditional
or form-based security interests represented by the common law under
and the functional security system represented by STMA 2017 in Nigeria
and UCC Art 9 in the USA? To draw up such a comparison you must first
identify the process of attachment and enforcement of security under the
functional system. Kieninger (Ed) (2004) identified three elements of
attachments and enforceability. They are:

   (1) value has been given (this requires no more than simple consideration;
   it includes the existence of previously extended credit as well as a promise
   to extend credit); (2) the debtor has rights in the collateral (the debtor's
   interest need not be full ownership, nor need it necessarily have been paid
   for, and it might even be a voidable title); and (3) either (i) the debtor has
   authenticated a security agreement that provides a description of the
   collateral, or (ii) with respect to specified types of collateral, the collateral
   is, pursuant to a security agreement, in the secured party's ``possession"
   (..) or control.38

At this point, it must be pointed out that attachment of security is not the
same thing as perfection of security. Also, as you will see further in the
course, there are slight differences between the key elements of security
interest (attachment, perfection, priorities, etc) under the common law
(form-based) security interests and the building blocks of security interest
under the functional security interests regime, which STMA 2017
(Nigeria) and UCC Art 9 (USA) represents.

2.4.2 Perfection

Security interest is said to be created if attachment has occurred. Although
not perfected, it can be enforced against the debtor. In other words,
perfection is not a precondition for enforcement of security interest. What
then is the effect of perfection? Without perfection the right of the creditor
as against third parties will be curtailed. Perfection occurs when
registration formalities have been complied with. Under CAMA
registration of a charge must be completed within 90 days of creation;39

38 Sigman H.C. (2004). "Security in movables in the United States ­ Uniform Commercial Code Article
9: a basis for comparison" in Kieninger, E. (Ed). (2004). Security Rights in Movable Property in
European Private Law. Cambridge University Press, United Kingom. p 65.
39 Section 222(1) CAMA 2020

52
CLL805  MODULE 3

section 8 STMA provides that a Security Interest is perfected when a
Financing Statement relating to Security Interest has been registered in
the Collateral Registry;40 and the Bills of Sale Law provides that
registration must be completed "within seven clear days after the making
or giving of such bill of sale."41

Perfection has an inextricable relationship with priorities. The power of
priorities (see next unit for further discussion on priorities) is felt during
the insolvency of the debtor.42 There are two sides to the issue of
priorities: priorities at the scenario of the debtor's pre-insolvency; and
priorities at the level of the debtor's insolvency. Priorities will be treated
at a later stage of the Course.

 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 11

    1) A creditor with a security interest that has effectively attached but yet
        to take steps to achieve perfection will lose --------- to a subsequent
        creditor with perfected interest.

    2) It has been aptly submitted that where all the ingredients of attachment
        do not coexist and are not present at the same, the security interest is -
        -------------

    3) A registrable charge created by a company must be registered with the
        Corporate Affairs Commission within ----------------

    4) Where a registrable charge is not registered within the time set for it,
        the instrument of charge is declared to be -------------- against the
        liquidator and creditor of the company.

    5) Attachment of security is not a factor or issue to be trifled with. In light
        of this and assuming other conditions or ingredients have been met, the
        asset furnished as security must be ------------------ and any -------- set
        for attachment must have been fulfilled.

    6) Why do you think non-possessory security was initially characterised
        as emitting the fire of apparent or false wealth problem?

    7) Beyond industrialisation, another critical factor that pushed non-
        possessory security is--

    8) Do you agree that the concept of numerus clausus of security interests
        known to English law still applies with equal force in Nigeria?

    9) Identify, with examples, the three types of documentary intangibles
        known to you.

    10) Discover and list no less than four categorisations of assets which are
        amenable to security.

2.5 Summary

40 See Module 5 for further discussion. Also see Merchant Shipping Act 2007 for perfection of
interests in ships.
41 Section 18 Bills of Sale Law. Also see Civil Aviation Act 2006 for perfection of security interests in
aircrafts.
42 For exhaustive reading on priorities, see Beale et al, pp 451-555

                                                                                            53
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Numerus clausus are the pledge, lien, mortgage and charge. These are
categorized into possessory security (made up of the pledge and lien) and
non-possessory security (constituted by the mortgage and charge). All the
numerus clausus of security interests are collectively called consensual
security interest. Irrespective of which category a specific type of security
falls, there must be attachment before it is said to be created. Six
conditions which coexist and be present at the same were identified in this
connection. While attachment causes the interest thereby created to fasten
on the asset subject to security, it is not the same thing as perfection. Once
a security interest has attached, it becomes enforceable against the debtor.
However, if it is not perfected, it cannot be enforced against third parties,
particularly those that may set up competing equities. Various laws, like
the Bills of Sale Law, Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act,
Companies and Allied Matters Act, Civil Aviation Act, and Merchant
Shipping Act provide the conditions or requirements for perfection.
Another critical consideration has to do with priorities, to be considered
later in the Course.

2.6 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
Beale, H., Bridge, M., Gullifer, L., and Lomnicka, E. (2012). The Law of

        Security and Title-based Financing, 2nd ed, Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.

Civil Aviation Act 2006.

Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020.

Credit Reporting Act 2017.

Davies, P.L. (2003)). Gower and Davies' Principles of Modern Company
        Law, Seventh editon. London: Sweet & Maxwell.

Gilmore, G., "Security Law, Formalism and Article 9" (1968) Nebraska
        Law Review 47(4):659 Available online at
        http://digitalcommons.unl.edu/nlr/vol47/iss4/3

Gullifer, L. (Ed). (2012). Goode on Legal problems of Credit and
        Security. Fourth edition. London: Sweet & Maxwell.

McKendrick, E. (Ed). (2010). Goode on Commercial Law, Fourth edition.
        London: Penguin Books.

Merchant Shipping Act 2007.

Nwogu, T.O. (2011). Secured Transactions Law of Nigeria and Cameroun
        through the Lens of Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code of

54
CLL805                                                MODULE 3

        the United States of America (Doctoral Thesis) Department of
        Legal Studies, Central European University, Budapest.

Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017.

2.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 11

1) Priority
2) Inchoate
3) Ninety days
4) Void
5) Identified, contractual conditions
6) Non-possessory security was originally thought of as creating apparent

         or false wealth problem because the debtor who created such a security
         interest is left with possession of the same assets charged as security.
         Security interest divests the debtor of its proprietary right and locates in
         the security interest of the creditor. Thus, by remaining in possession
         innocent third parties mistake the debtor as still the owner of the assets
         when the reverse is the case.
7) Another factor that facilitated the growth of non-possessory security is
         the relaxation of the prohibition on interest rates.
8) The numerus clausus of security interests known to English law are four
         ­ the pledge, lien, mortgage and charge. In Nigeria following the advent
         of unitary security regime by the passage of the law on secured
         transactions in personal property (represented by STMA) the numerus
         clausus no longer applied to Nigeria. The STMA has now made it
         possible to recognise functionally equivalent security devices as capable
         of creating security interest.
9) The three types of documentary intangibles are (a) documents of title to
         payment of money (termed instruments), (b) documents of title to
         negotiable securities (e.g. bearer bonds and notes) and (c) documents of
         title to goods (like bill of lading)
10) The categories of assets subject to security (a) tangible and intangible
         assets, (b) real and personal property, (c) fixed and circulating assets,
         and (d) present and future assets

                                                      55
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 3 PRIORITY OF SECURITY INTERESTS43

Unit Structure

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
3.3 General principle of priority rule
3.4 Priorities in form-based security interests

         3.4.1 Possessory security interests and non-posssessory security
                interests

         3.4.2 Non-possessory security interests
         3.4.3 Priorities under Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020
3.5 Exceptions to the nemo dat rule
3.6 Summary
3.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
3.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction
    Priorities considered under this unit are in the context of form-
    based security interests, otherwise known as the numerus clausus
    of security interests. The priorities regime under functional
    security interests are discussed in Module 5. The foundation of
    priority rule is the principle that no one can give what he or she
    does not have. The latin principle is nemo dat quod non habet. It
    finds application in respect of legal interests, whether it is
    "absolute" interest or coming to life "by way of security
    interest."44

3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
    At the end of this unit, you should be able to:
        o Understand the meaning of priority in the context
            security interests
        o Explain the different bases of priority rule
        o Apply the priority rule in practice

3.3 General priority rule
    The foundation or the general rule of priority is said to be the
    principle that "no one can give what they do not have." It is
    expressed in the latin phrase nemo dat quod non habet. It applies

43 For a detailed reading on Priorites of all forms of interests, see Beale et al. (2012). The Law of
Security and Title-Based Financing, second edition. Oxford University Press, Part IV, Chapters 12, 13,
14, 15, 16 and 17, pages 451-555.
44 Ibid, p. 451

56
CLL805  MODULE 3

to interests created by way of security (which is our concern
here) as well as absolute interests. What then do you think is the
implication of this rule? Simply put, where two legal interests in
relation to a thing (property) collide or compete, the first in time
prevails. Otherwise called the nemo dat rule, itss application is
restricted to legal interests. You will ask, do we have equivalent
rule in equity? Yes we do.

In equity the equivalent rule is stated "qui prior est tempore
potior est jure," meaning "he who is earlier in time is stronger
in law." Accordingly, where there are two competing equitable
interests, the general of rule equity is that the person whose
equity first attached to the property is entited to priority over the
other. Hence, where equities are equal, with neither claimant
having a legal interest in respect of the property, the first im time
prevails. From the foregoing, what is priority?

Beale, et al (2012) simplified the meaning of priority thus:
    The rules of priority determine when A's interest in an asset
    prevails over B's interest. If A's interest is an absolute interes,
    then, if A has priority over B, there is nothing left for B to
    have, and B gets nothing. (On the other hand) if A's interest
    is a security, then, depending upon the amount of the debt
    secured at the time priority is being considered, there may be
    sufficient value in the asset to enable B to claim after A has
    enforced its claim against the debtor.

How do you achieve or prove priority? This is where the concept
of registration enters the picture. Usually, registration of an
interest is used to determine priority. However this is not to be
taken as laying down a general rule. For instance, under the
STMA 2017 (although this applies to functional security
discussed fully in Module 5) registering a financing statement
without a validly-created security agreement does not achieve
third party effectivenesss. In other words, the requirements of
the law governing the transaction creating the security interest
must be fully complied with if priority is to be effective against
third pary encumbrancers.

        57
CLL805                          LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.4 Priorities in form-based security interests

      3.4.1 Priorities between posessory security interests and non-
              possessory security interests
              What are the rules of priorities between possessory security
              interests and non-possessory security interests? Beale et al
              (2012) provided a helpful guide by showing priorities (a)
              where the non-possessory interest is registered abd (b)
              wghere the non-possessory interest is not registered.45 We
              shall consider them briefly.

               (a) Where the non-possessory interest is registered.
                   The behaviour of priority is subject to whether it is a
                   possessory interest followed by a non-possessory
                   interest. In either case, the priority rule differs. Of
                   course, note that possessory interest has to do with
                   pledge and lien; while non-possessory interest relates to
                   a charge or mortgage. With the exception of a charge
                   deffered for second semester, pledge, lien and mortgage
                   are treated in Module 4.

                    (i) Pedge or lien followed by charge or mortgage.
                          Pledge involves transfer of possession from the
                          debtor to the creditor. Where this happens, the
                          general property in the pledged asset remains with
                          the pledgor; while the special property with
                          actionable right residing in the pledgee. The
                          contract of pledge creates a legal interest vesting in
                          the pledgee. Going back to our general rule of first
                          in time, it implies that "any subsequently created
                          security interest (legal or equitable) in the assets
                          will take subject to the pledge, unless an exception
                          to the first in time rule applies." Can you think of
                          any possible exception to this rule in this
                          connection? An example of such an exception
                          would be where the creditor as pledgee authorised
                          the debtor as pledgor to create a non-possessory
                          interest that ranks in priority to its interest. What
                          non-possessory interests are envisaged here? They
                          are charge and mortgage. Generally it would be
                          difficult to create any interest in priority over the
                          interests of the pledgee. Why is this the case? The
                          pledge by its very nature puts the pledge in
                          possession of the property subject to pledge.

45 Beale, et al (2012), p. 461

58
CLL805                                                                          MODULE 3

             As to lien followed by charge or mortgage the
             position is the same, whether the lien arises as
             possessory or contractual lien. The mere fact that
             lienee retains possession of the assets implies that
             the interest ranks in priority over any subsequently
             created non-possessory interests. It would be
             unduly stretching the law too far to supposed that
             since the nature of the interest of the lienee is not
             proprietary but merely possessory it should be
             "subservient" to any subsequent proprietary
             interest. This would amount determining priority
             according to the nature of interest as against the
             general rule of first in time.46 For purposes of
             priority, when contractual lien said to be created? It
             is at the time the contract of lient was entered and
             not at the time that the lienee asserts its right and
             takes possession of the assets, especially if the
             exercise of rights comes later in time.47

        (ii) Legal mortgage followed by pledge or lien. A
             validly registered legal mortgage ranks in priority
             over a subsequent incumbrancing pledge in respect
             of the same assets. The law is strict here. Thus, the
             priority of a legal mortgagee over a subsequent
             incumbrancing pledgee will apply whether or not
             the latter knows of the prior mortgage. Does the
             strict application extend to exceptions to the nemo
             dat rule (to be considered below)? Yes, it does,
             because the mortgagor (who is the grantor of the
             interest) is neither a buyer nor a seller.

             What if the instrument creating the mortgage
             specifically permits the mortgagor to be remain in
             possession of the goods, which is the subject of a
             subsequent pledge? Will the case be different? No,
             because as rightly pointed out, "merely leaving the
             mortgagor in possession of the goods would not
             amount to either express or ostensible authority" to
             deal with the goods in a manner inconsistent with
             the proprietary interests of the mortgagee.

             With respect to lien, the position is the same so that
             where the mortgagor creates a subsequent

46 Re Diesels & Compnents Pty Ltd (1985) 2 Qd R 456, 460 SC Queensland
47 Geogre Barker (Transport) Ltd v Eynon (1974) 1 WLR 462, CA.

                                                                                            59
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

                          incumbrancing lien the interests of the lienee would
                          be subordinate to that of the mortgagee.

                    (iii) Charge or equitable mortgage followed by pledge
                          or lien. Where there is a prior charge or mortgage
                          followed by a pledge the subsequent incumbrancing
                          pledgee will take free of the charge or equitable
                          mortgage provided it (the pledgee) gave value and
                          had no notice of the charge or mortgage at the time
                          of taking its interest.48 What is the reason for this
                          position? This is because a charge or equitable
                          mortgage confers equitable interest while pledge
                          grants legal interest. This is similar to the postion of
                          CAMA 2020 on floating charge and fixed charge.
                          Thus a subsequent fixed charge will rank in priority
                          over a prior floating charge, except there is a
                          negative pledge covenant in the instrument creating
                          the floating charge and the incumbrancing pledgee
                          had notice of the negative pledge. Now notice here
                          is constructive, deemed to be complete where the
                          instrument creating the floating charge is filed
                          (registered) with the Commissin.49

                          On the position of the law regarding a charge or
                          equitable followed by lien, there are differing
                          positions. Beale, et al (2012) believes that:

                                 a lienholder who takes for value and without
                                notice will probably take free of a prior equitable
                                security interest. It would seem very unlikely that
                                the doctrine of constructive notice would apply
                                to the holder of a lien, since usually the
                                transaction which gives rise to the lien is not
                                primarioly one of security buyt relates to sme
                                other sort of service.50

                          On the other hand, Watts (ed) (2010)51 insists that
                          the possessory lien of an agent is subject to all the
                          rights and equities of third parties available against
                          the principal at that time, and this irrespective of
                          whether the person taking the lien had notice of
                          prior equities. What is the common point in the
                          positions of Beale et al and Watts? It relates to the
                          question of notice. Both of them believes that

48 Joseph v Lynns (1884) 15 QBD; Beale, et al (2012), p. 476
49 Section 204 CAMA 2020
50 See Module 4 for a discussion on lien.
51 Watts, P.G. (Ed). (2010). Bowstead & Reynolds on Agency, 19th edition. Sweet & Maxwell, UK.

60
CLL805  MODULE 3

                   constructive notice would be inputed against the
                   subsequent lienholder. That being the case, the
                   positon of Beale et al is preferred.

         (b) Where the non-possessory interest is not registered.
             More often than the creation of non-possessory security
             interest would require registration.Therefore the law is
             that an unregistered but registrable non-possessory
             interest is void against the liquidator and any creditor of
             the company.52 Consequently, all possessory securities
             would have priority over registrable but unregistered
             non-possessory security interest.

3.4.2 Priority between non-possessory security interests
        The brief discussion here is three-fold: where both security
        interess are registered; where one security interest is
        registered; and where neither interest is registered

        (a) Where both security interests are registered.
            The general rule of first in time of creations applies to
            competing security interests. Is there any difference
            between time of creation and time of registration? Priority
            is determined by the time of creating the security interest
            in question and not time of registration. Beale et al (2012)
            aply explained the position:
                 ... if security interest 1 is created on 1 May and
                registered on 18 May, it will have priority over security
                interest interest 2, which is created on 18 May and
                registered on 15 May, even though the holder of
                security interest 2 registered first and could not have
                discovered security interest 1 from a search of the
                register.

            So registration becomes an issue if the holder registers the
            interest outside the time allowed for registration. For
            instance, the allowed for registration every charge created
            by any company is "within 90 days after the date of its
            creation."53 There are cases where the order of priority
            above will not apply. For instance, as between legal and
            equitable interests, the legal interest will have priority
            even if it is created later in time. Provided the holder of
            the later legal security interest does not have notice of the
            prior equitable security interest. Also, under the STMA
            2017 which is propped on unitary security system and

52 Section 222(1) CAMA 2020
53 Ibid

                                                                                            61
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

                   discussed in Module 5, purchase money security interest
                   (PMSI) enjoys super priority status over any prior security
                   interest in respect of the same asset.54

              (b) Where one security interest is registered.
                   The priority between an unregistered and a registered
                   security interest is that the unregistered interest will be
                   void against the registered interest. That is registered
                   interest has priority over unregistered interest. What are
                   the situations where questions of priority between
                   registered and unregistered interests would arise?

                   It occurs where the holder of the unregistered interest
                   applied for leave to register out of time55 the leave would
                   be subject to a condition that the intervening rights of
                   secured creditors are not to be prejudiced. The effect of
                   this is that the priority of registerd interests would not be
                   disturbed at the time of late registration.

                   Beale, et al (2012) submit that "if the unregistered
                   security is not registrable in that it does not fall within the
                   numerus clausus in section 860(7) of the Companies Act
                   2006,56 ... then the first in time rule (or an exception to
                   that rule) applies." In other words, the position is not clear
                   cut with respect to the United Kingdom regime. In Nigeria
                   the STMA 2017 which transplanted UCC Art 9 unitary
                   security system based on notice filing has answered the
                   question. See Module 5 for a discussion.

              (c) Where neither security interest is registered.
                   Where neither is registered, perhaps because interest is
                   registrable but not registered within the time period (for
                   example `within 90 days from the date of it creation') and
                   the other is not registrable, the effect is that the out of time
                   registered interest will be void against the security that is
                   not registrable. Subject to the any prior `within the time
                   period' registered interest, the not-registrable interest
                   would have priority.

3.5 Exceptions to Nemo dat rule
    Recall the basic principle of the nemo dat rule, which is where two
    legal interests in relation to a thing (property) collide or compete,

54 Section 27 STMA 2017
55 Section 222(3) CAMA; Section 873 English Companies Act 2006
56 English Companies Act 2006. See section 222(1) CAMA 2020 for a similar provision

62
CLL805  MODULE 3

    the first in time prevails. We shall discuss a few of the exceptions to
    this basic rule in relation to security interests.

         (a) A purchaser of legal interest
             The principle here is that a person who acquires a legal interest
             in good faith and without notice takes priority over the holder
             of an equitable interest. The situations where this exception
             arise is equitable interest followed by good faith acquisition of
             legal interest. Just like the position of CAMA regarding the
             priority of a subsequent fixed charge over a prior floating
             charge, the principle is established on the principle that "the
             person acquiring the legal interest must furnish value57 and not
             have actual or constructive notice of a prior equitable interest
             at the time she acquired her interst.58

             Do you think the position would be the same if the subsequent
             incumbrancing interest was also equitable? The position
             would be that the subsequent equitable interest would be
             subject to the prior equitable interest on the principle that
             where the equities are equal, the first in time prevails.59
             However, if the holder of the subsequent equitable interest
             takes step at a later date to acquire the legal interest in the
             property, she would gain priority over the holder of a prior
             equitable interest, albeit he knew of the prior equitable interest
             at the time the legal interest was acquired. This is known as the
             doctrine of tabula in naufragio.60

         (b) The rule in Dearle v Hall
             As an exception to the nemo dat rule, the rule Dearle v Hall
             ordains that priority between assignees of chose in action is
             governed by the order of giving notice of the assignment to the
             debtor, providing that the assignee giving notice does not
             know of the previous assignment at the time of its assignment
             or when the avance is made.

             However, the STMA 2017 materially altered the operation of
             the rule in Dearle v Hall in the Nigerian context. Thus
             Ozekhome (2017) writes that the rule in Dearle v Hall, which
             used to be a vehicle towards achieving third party
             effectiveness in book debts/accounts-receivable, has been
             supplanted by the collateral registry. Thus, security interests in

57 Re Diplock (1948) Ch 465, CA
58 Pilcher v Rawlins (1872) LR 7 Ch App 259, Joseph v Lyons (1884) 15 QBD 280
59 The latin maxim is qui prior est tempore potior est jure," meaning "he who is earlier in time is
stronger in law."
60 For a detailed explanation of the doctrine, which is a form of tacking, and other types of tacking,
see Beale, et all (2012), p. 506.

                                                                                            63
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

            accounts-receivable must be registered in the collateral
            registry in order to achieve third party effectiveness.61

        (c) Statutory exceptions to the nemo dat rule
            The Sale of Goods Act restates the general rule of nemo dat
            that one cannot give what he does not have thus: where goods
            are sold by a person who is not their owner, and who does not
            sell them under the authority or with the consent of the
            owner, the buyer acquires no better title to the goods than the
            seller had.62 These relate to absolute interests whereas our
            concern is security interest. A few examples would suffice.
              (i) Estoppel. If the owner of goods represents that another is
                  his agent or allows a person to represent himself as his
                  agent, although no such agency exists in fact, he, the
                  owner will be estopped from denying the existence of his
                  agents authority to act, on his behalf, in relation to the
                  goods. The estoppel exception is given effect by the
                  second limb of section 21(1) providing that "unless the
                  owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded from
                  denying the seller's authority to sell" and further fortified
                  by section 61(2) of the Act.

              (ii) Sale by a person with a voidable title. The buyer, who
                  buys in good faith and without notice of any defect in the
                  title of the seller, will acquire good title if the goods are
                  bought from a seller whose title is voidable but at the time
                  of the sale it has not been avoided.63

            (iii) Sale by a seller or a buyer in possession. See section
                  25(1) of the Act for the exception in the case of a sale by
                  a seller in possession and section 25(2) of the Act for the
                  exception as to buyer in possession.

        (d) Priority normally established by date of registration
            By now your mind must have been agitated as regards the
            postion of the nemo dat rule respecting priority established
            by date or registration. Writing on this, Beale, et al (2012) the
            rule is capable of being altered by statutory provisions:
              giving priority to a security interest that has been registered
              over the one has not. There is no consistent pattern to these
              provisions. Some give priority to the first secured party to
              register whether or not the secured party knew there was an
              earlier security interest, others only if the second secured party

61 See sections 8(1) and 33(3) STMA 2017; Ozekhome (2017), p. 188
62 Section 21(1) Sale of Goods Act 1893
63 Ibid, section 23; Kings Norton Metall Co Ltd v Edridge, Merrette Co Ltd (1897) 14 GLR 98

64
CLL805  MODULE 3

        was unaware of the earlier interest. Some apply oly to legal
        interests because only a legal interest may be registered under
        the relevant staturoy scheme; others permit registration of
        legal and equitable intersts and give priortity to either.64

      Let us provide you with an example of a security interest where
      priority is usually established by order of registration as
      against date of creation. Before then you should always bear
      in mind that the STMA 2017 regime does not apply to certain
      security interests. They are security interest over real property
      (land), any interest created by a transfer, assignment or
      mortgage in movable property governed by a law for which a
      registry has been established with regards to ships and
      aircrafts. Also, the STMA 2017 did not supplant or override or
      cancel the creation of security interests in the form of charges
      by companies registered under the CAMA 2020. The
      limitations imply that multi-registry exists in Nigeria, despite
      the unitary security system founded on an integrated registry
      system, on which the STMA 2017 is based.

      Against the above background, a typical example within the
      Nigerian context is Security interest over ships. Section 56(1)
      Merchant Shipping Act 2007 states that If there are more
      mortgages than one registered in respect of a ship or share, the
      Priority of mortgagees shall, notwithstanding any express,
      implied or constructive notice, be entitled mortgages in
      priority one over the other, according to the date on which each
      mortgage is recorded in the register and not according to the
      date of each mortgage itself.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 12

  1) Briefly explain the principle of tabula in naufragio.
  2) Differential between the doctrines of nemo dat quod non habet and qui

       prior est tempore potior est jure.
  3) What is effect of STMA 2017 on the application of the rule in Dearle v

       Hall in Nigeria?
  4) State the position of CAMA 2020 where a subsequent fixed is created

       in the face of prior floating charge.
  5) Is there any difference in law between "time of creation" of a security

       interest and "time of registration" of a security interest?
  6) Enumerate the limitations to the application of STMA 2017.

64 Beale, et al (2017), p. 488

                                                                                            65
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.6 Summary
    So far you have been exposed to the principles of priority of security
    inreersts in its various forms. As much as possible, where the new
    legal regime of STMA 2017 affects the application of priority as
    you know, this has been brought out accordingly. The discussion
    priorities with resepct to form-based security interests will be
    brought to bear on your understanding of priorities under STMA
    2017 in Module 5.

3.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
1. Beale, et al (2012). The Law of Security and Title-based Financing.
2. Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020
3. McKendrick, E. (Ed). (2010). Goode on Commercial Law, Fourth

    edition. London: Penguin Books.
4. Merchant Shipping Act 2007.
5. Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2007

5.1 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

 1) The principle of tabula in naufragio is a type of tacking which concerns
      priorities that arise between the holdders of A and B, of two equitable
      interests. So far as A is first in time and thus ranks ahead of B, B may
      still, if given the chance to do so, acquire the legal estate so as to
      promote his interest in the property ahead of A' interest.

 2) The difference between the two doctrines is that while nemo dat quod
      non habet applies to legal interest in an asset and qui prior est tempore
      potior est jure applies to equitable interest in an asset.

 3) The effect of STMA 2017 is that the rule in Dearle v Hall no longer
      finds application in the Nigerian jurisdiction with respect to assignment
      of choses in action.

 4) The position of CAMA 2020 is that a subsequent fixed charge will rank
      in priority over a prior floating charge, except there is a negative
      pledge covenant in the instrument creating the floating charge and the
      incumbrancing pledgee had notice of the negative pledge?

 5) There is a difference in reckoning priority. For instance, where priority
      is based on time of creation, first-to-create but last-registered interest
      will be subordinated to a second-to-create but first-registered interest.
      On the other hand, where date of registration is the basis of priority,
      then the interest that is first registered irrespective of time of creation
      will rank in priority over the later registered interest.

 6) The limitations to the application of STMA 2017 are:
      (a) Security interest over real property (land),
      (b) Any interest created by a transfer, assignment or mortgage in
           movable property governed by a law for which a registry has been
           established with regards to ships and aircrafts.
      (c) It did not supplant or override or cancel the creation of security
           interests in the form of charges by companies registered under the
           Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020

66
CLL805                                                MODULE 4

MODULE 4 COMMON LAW (FORM-BASED)
SECURITY INTERESTS

Unit 1  Pledge
Unit 2  Lien
Unit 3  Mortgages
Unit 4  Enforcement of Common Law Security Interests

UNIT 1 PLEDGE AS A FORM OF SECURITY

Unit structure

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
1.3 How to Create Pledge Contract

        1.3.1 Nature of the Interest of Pledgee
        1.3.2 Parties to a Pledge Contract
        1.3.3 Properties Amenable to Pledge Contract
1.4 Possession and Delivery of the Pledge Property
        1.4.1 Delivery
        1.4.2 Conditions for Constructive Delivery
1.5 Dealings with the Pledge Property
        1.5.1 Where the Pledgee Redelivers to the Pledgor
        1.5.2 Where the Pledgee Redelivers under a Trust Receipt
        1.5.3 Where the Pledgee Repledges to a Subpledgee
1.6 Pledge Compared with Lien and Mortgage
1.7 Summary
1.8 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
1.9 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction

The pledge is the first form of possessory security. The pledge contract
is the oldest means of creating security interest in property for the
repayment of loan or discharge of an obligation. It involves the delivery
(which may physical or constructive) of the debtor's asset to the creditor
as security for "an obligation until payment of a debt or fulfilment of an
obligation. Although certain factors disfavoured the continued utility
value of the pledge1 in its traditional sense or formulation,2 it is, today,
widely "confined for business purposes to documental intangibles."3

1 Flint, G.L., Secured Transactions History: The Fraudulent Myth (Spring 1999) New Mexico Law
Review 29:263
2 A distinction has been drawn between traditional (customary) pledge, term pledge, and self-
redeeming pledge: Brown, M.E., and Evangel, A. "Mortgage, Pledge and Charge Transactions in
Nigeria: Comparative/Distinctive Analysis and Legal Examination" (Sep-Oct 2013) International

                                                                                            57
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

There is technical as well as ordinary sense in which the word `pledge'
can be used. When someone makes a pledge, he undertakes or promises
to do something. However, when someone furnishes and delivers his
asset as assurance for repayment of a debt, pledge takes on technical
meaning. In its technical sense, pledge is marked by three
characteristics,4 namely pledge is a pledge and there is no such thing as
legal or equitable pledge;5 unlike other species of security, pledge is
rarely evidenced in writing; the pledgee is always put into possession of
the asset; and as a fourth element, the pledgee may, subject to
exceptions,6 be permitted to use the pledged property in the ordinary
way.7 Where the pledgee uses the pledged property (like jewels and
bracelets), what do you think would be the legal consequences? The
pledgee is liable if the property is lost or damaged or misused,8 and the
pledgee must account for the use.9 The topic of pledge will be examined
around creation, possession, dealing and enforcement.

1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 explain the meaning of pledge in different senses
 understand and know how pledge into existence
 distinguish between the pledge and other possessory security

        Interests, and
 appreciate the enforcement powers available to the creditor

        (pledgee)
 apply your knowledge to practical situations.

Organisation of Scientific Research Journal of Business and Management. Available online at
http://iosrjournals.org/iosr-jbm/papers/Vol3-issue6/00136100107.pdf Accessed 12/10/2014
3 Bridge, M.G., Macdonald, R.A., Simmonds, R.L., and Walsh, C., "Formalism, Functionalism and
Understanding the Law of Secured Transactions" (1999) McGill Law Journal 44:567, p. 634
4 Goldface-Irokalibe, p 116
5 Donald v Sukcling (1866) LR 1 (QB) 585
6 For example, where cloths or linens are subject of the pledge, the pledgee cannot use
7 Coggs v Bernard (1703) 2 Ld Rayn 909
8 ibid
9 In Okoiko & Anor v Esadalue (1974) NMLE 377, a case of traditional pledge, it was held that no
longer can the pledgee take all the profit from his commercial exploitation of the land and still get
back his original capital.

58
CLL805  MODULE 4

1.3 How to Create Pledge Contract

The pledge contract is created by contract only. To explore the topic of
creation of pledge, the following questions will be answered: what is the
nature of the interest of the pledgee; who are the parties to the contract
creating pledgor-pledgee relationship; and who specie of assets are
capable of being pledged as security?

1.3.1 Nature of the Interest of the Pledgee

The general property in the pledged asset remains with the pledgor;
while the special property with actionable right residing in the pledgee.10
The extent of interest of the pledgee in the pledged asset did not wash
off its proprietary character, although it may be limited when contrasted
with the proprietary interest of a creditor with security interest by way of
a mortgage. By reason of the creditor's special property in the pledge, he
has a right to possession, which is protected against third party that may
wrongfully interfere with that possession.11

1.3.2 The Parties to a Pledge Contract

The persons who may be able to create a valid contract of pledge are the
original owner of the property, mercantile agent, joint owner of a
property, fraudulent possessor and the pledgee by way of repledge. With
respect to joint ownership (or control or possession) of property, the
consent of the other party must be sought and obtained.12 A fraudulent
possessor can create a valid pledge if the contract by which the pledgor
came into possession of the goods has not ended before pledging the
goods and the pledgee acted bona fide without notice of the defect in the
pledgor's title.13 What specie of property which if in the possession of a
fraudulent possessor would pose a clear and present danger?14

1.3.3 Properties Amenable to Pledge Contract

Except an asset can be reduced into physical or constructive possession
it is not pledgeable. All movable or personal property can be subject to
pledge.15 Under common law, the pledge of land, an immovable
property, is not possible.16 This does not override the lawfulness of

10 The Odessa (1916) 1 AC 145; Iwuchkwu v Anyanwu (1993) 8 NWLR (Pt 311 307; Sealy, L.S. and
Hooley, R.J.A., Commercial Law: Text, Cases and Materials, 4th ed Oxford: OUP, p. 1092; Beale, et al,
p. 99
11 Beale, et al, ibid
12 Dublin City Distillery Ltd v Doherty (1914) AC 823
13 Goldface-Irokalibe, p. 124
14 The clearest case is documentary intangibles, like bill of lading
15 See section 2(1)(a) STMA 2017 on this
16 By section 2(2)(b) STMA 2017, the Act does not apply to creation or transfer of an interest in land.

                                                                                            59
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

customary pledge of land.17 Since documentary intangibles constitute
property capable of being pledged, what is the implication of the
dematerialisation regime being implemented by stock exchanges across
the world? The regime allows shares of quoted entities to be held in an
electronic central securities depository as against certificated shares
issued to individual shareholders.18 Certificated shares, dematerialised
shares and intermediated securities are not subject of a pledge.19 They
can be subject to mortgage or charge.20

1.4 Possession and Delivery of the Pledge Property

1.4.1 Delivery

This is at the heart of a pledge, which explains why it is limited to
movable or personal chattels capable of actual or symbolic delivery.
Documents of title to goods (like bill of lading) are perfected by
constructive or symbolic delivery. That is the actual goods are deemed
delivered to the pledgee who may not be in actual possession.21 When
bill of lading (BoL) is pledged, the title to the goods embodied in the
BoL is in the pledgee-banker. However, it happens that the banker
would need to release the BoL so that the debtor could gain possession
of the goods, sell them and repay the loan. The banker does this under a
TRUST RECEIPT.22 The trust receipt usually states that (a) the debtor
holds the BoL as a trustee of the bank; (b) he would use the BoL to sell
the goods as the banker's agent; (c) he would hold the goods until sale;
and (d) after sale he would hold the proceeds on trust for the banker.

1.4.2 Conditions for Constructive Delivery

Apart from constructive delivery of documentary intangibles as
aforesaid, constructive delivery can take place under certain conditions.
It can take place where the pledgor agrees to turn over its right to the
pledgee in respect of the pledgor's property. This could be completed by
the process of attornment:

17 Yashe v Umar (2003) 13 NWLR (Pt 838) 465: a pledge cannot transform into permanent
ownership.
18 The Nigerian Stock Exchange depository is called the Central Securities Clearing System (CSCS).
19 Compare this with the US jurisdiction which permits pledge of registered securities (like shares):
sections 9-301 and 9-313(a) US Uniform Commercial Code (revised)
20 For detailed reading, see McFarlane B. and Stevens R. "Interests in Securities: Practical Problems
and Conceptual Solutions". In Guliifer L. and Payne, J. (Eds), Intermediated Securities: Legal
Problems and Practical Issues. Oxford: Hart Publishing (2010) p. 33.
21 When other documents relating to goods that are not recognised as documents of title are
pledged, only the documents themselves, and not the goods, are pledged. Examples of such
documents not recognised as documents of title are delivery orders, delivery warrants and
warehouse receipts.
22 In North-Western Bank Ltd v John Poynter, Son & Macdonalds (1895) AC 56 HL, the court stated
that the trust receipt (letter of trust) preserves the bank's pledge over the documents and goods.
Also see, Sealy and Hooley, p. 1099; Beale, et al, p. 114

60
CLL805  MODULE 4

If the pledgor had the actual goods in his physical possession he could
effect the pledge by actual delivery; in other cases he could give
possession by some symbolic act, such as handing over the key of the
store in which they were. If, however, the goods were in the custody of
a third person, who held for the bailor so that in law his possession was
that of the bailor, the pledge could be effected by a change of the
possession of the third party, that is by an order to him from the pledgor
to hold for the pledgee, the change being perfected by the third party
attorning to the pledgee, that is acknowledging that he thereupon held
for him; there was thus a change of possession and a constructive
delivery: the goods in the hands of the third party became by this
process in the possession constructively of the pledgee.23

Constructive delivery can also take place if the keys to the warehouse
containing the goods are delivered to the pledgee. On this basis, does a
valid pledge exist where the contract states "the goods to be locked up,
the keys in your possession and you to have right to remove same as
desired?"24 Where there is joint control of the warehouse, the consent of
the other party is a necessary condition for the creation of a valid
security by way of pledge.25

1.5 Dealings with the Pledge Property

Dealing with the property subject to the pledge can arise under varying
conditions. These are considered next. It should be noted that where the
creditor parts with possession of the property, he, as a general
proposition, losses his special property.

1.5.1 Where the Pledgee Redelivers to the Pledgor

A redelivery of the property to the pledgor by the pledgee divests the
latter of the special property in the subject matter. Will the case be
different if the pledgor obtains possession unauthorizedly or
fraudulently? The pledge will be preserved. However, where the interest
of a third party who takes the property bona fide for value and without
notice has intervened the pledgee's right is lost. The pledgee must
protect its possession as losing the same, whether consensually or
fraudulently, may potentially wipe away its security interest.

23 Per Lord Wright in Official Assignee of Madras v Mercantile Bank of India Ltd (1935) AC 53
(Emphasis added).
24 This appears to be the case in Wrightson v McArthur and Hutchisons (1919) Ltd (1921) 2 KB 807
25 Dublin City Distillery Ltd v Doherty (1914) AC 823

                                                                                            61
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

1.5.2 Where the Pledgee Redelivers under a Trust Receipt.

Dealing with the property subject to the pledge contract could arise in
the instance where the pledgee redelivers pursuant to a letter of trust.
This is an undertaking by the pledgor to hold the goods and its proceeds
on trust for the pledgee. Where this happens, the pledgor is in de facto
possession as against the pledgee that has constructive possession.
Under this arrangement, the special property of the pledgee is preserved.
However, the danger of an irresponsible pledgor repledging the
document of title to a third party is highly likely.26

1.5.3 Where the Pledgee Repledges to a Subpledgee

The pledgee may meddle with the property like repledging it to a
subpledgee. Generally, the pledgee can part with possession by pledging
the property to a subpledgee. However, the initial pledge must not be
destroyed thereby. This general rule is limited by two qualifications: the
terms of the contract must have allowed the repledge; and the repledge
must not have been prohibited by necessary implication arising out of
the exceptionally special character of the property subject to pledge.
Mellor J stated the general principles guiding repledge by repledgee:

In a contract of pledge for securing the payment of money... the
pawnee27 may sell and transfer the thing pledged on condition broken;
but what implied condition is there that the pledgee shall not in the
meantime part with the possession thereof to the extent of his interest? It
may be that upon a deposit by way of pledge, the express contract
between the parties may operate so as to make a parting with the
possession, even to the extent of his interest, before condition broken, so
essential a violation of it as to revest the right of possession in the
pawnor; but in the absence of such terms, why are they to be implied?
The object of the deposit is to secure the repayment of a loan, and the
effect is to create an interest and a right of property in the pawnee, to the
extent of the loan, in the goods deposited... (Thus if the pledgee) does
pledge the goods to a third person for a greater (or lesser) interest than
he possesses, such an act does not annihilate the contract of pledge
between himself and the pawnor; but... the transaction is simply
inoperative as against the original pawnor, who upon tender of the sum
secured immediately becomes entitled to the possession of the goods,
and can recover in an action for any special damage which he may have
sustained by reason of the act of the pawnee in repledging the goods.28
(Emphasis added)

26 Lloyds Bank Ltd v Bank of America (1938) 2 KB 147.
27 "Pawnee" and "pawnor" refers to "pledgee" and "pledgor" respectively
28 Donald v Suckling (supra)

62
CLL805  MODULE 4

1.6 Pledge Compared with Lien and Mortgage

While lien bears the possessory character of pledge, it is not the same
thing as the pledge. The differences between the two will be seen in due
course. Meanwhile, the pledge is intermediate between a lien and a
mortgage.29 Lien arises because of the lienor's right to possession of the
asset and not for the purpose of security ab initio. For instance, the
artificer who retains possession of the motor vehicle until he has been
paid the agreed fees for the repair services. However, in the case of
pledge the property is primarily and purposely delivered to the pledgee
for the purpose of security. With respect to mortgage, the mortgagor
conveys its entire interest in the asset to the mortgagee. With the pledge,
what is conveyed is the special property in the asset subject to pledge as
against the general property, which is retained by, and resident in, the
pledgor.30

        SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 12

        1) Identify the contents of a letter of trust.
        2) The principle is clear that where document of title is pledged,

                 perfection is by constructive delivery. However, where other
                 documents other than documents of title are pledge what is
                 really the subject of pledge as the between the documents
                 themselves or the goods represented by the documents?
        3) What do you understand by the term "attornment"?
        4) Briefly explain the statement the pledge is intermediate
                 between a lien and a mortgage.
        5) Identify what you consider to be the defects of the pledge as a
                 form of security.

1.7 Summary

There is no such thing as a legal or equitable pledge. Pledge is pledge; it
is rarely reduced into writing; the creditor is always put into possession;
and subject to exceptions the creditor may use the property in the
ordinary way. The interest granted to the pledgee is the general
(absolute) property while the pledgor retains the special property. On the
principle that only movable personal chattels are amenable to be
pledged, it is possible, under common law, to make a pledge of land, an
immovable property. This is not the case under the Nigerian customary
law, where pledge of land is common. Delivery is at the heart of pledge;
this is why it is limited to movable personal property. However, it is

29 Halliday v Holgate (1868) LR 3 Exch 299
30 Sheehan, D., The Principles of Personal Property Law, London: Hart Publishing (2011) p. 334

                                                                                            63
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

possible to make constructive delivery, especially with respect to
documents of title, like Bill of Lading. In this case, delivery is usually
covered by a Trust Receipt. Constructive delivery can also take place by
attornment. As to dealings with the pledged property, it is possible for
the pledgee to redeliver it to the pledgor, or to redeliver under a Trust
Receipt or even for the pledgee to repledge the property to a subpledgee.
Different consequences, as you saw above, flow from such dealings with
the pledged property.

1.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Bridge, M.G., Macdonald, R.A., Simmonds, R.L., and Walsh, C. (1999).
        "Formalism, Functionalism and Understanding the Law of
        Secured Transactions" McGill Law Journal 44:567.

Goldface-Irokalibe, I.J. (2007). Law of Banking in Nigeria. Lagos:
        Malthouse Law Books.

Gullifer L. and Payne, J. (Eds). (2010). Intermediated Securities: Legal
        Problems and Practical Issues. Oxford: Hart Publishing.

Sealy, L.S. and Hooley, R.J.A. (2009). Commercial Law: Text, Cases
        and Materials, Fourth edition Oxford: OUP.

Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017.

Sheehan, D. (2011). The Principles of Personal Property Law, London:
        Hart Publishing.

64
CLL805                                             MODULE 4

1.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

        1) The contents of a letter of trust are that (a) the debtor holds the
               Bill of Lading as a trustee of the bank; (b) he would use the
               BoL to sell the goods as the banker's agent; (c) he would hold
               the goods until sale; and (d) after sale he would hold the
               proceeds on trust for the banker.

        2) The documents themselves, and not the goods represented in
               them, are pledged.

        3) Attornment is a process whereby a third party, usually a bailor
               of the property subject to pledge, acknowledges to the pledgee
               that he (the third party) holds the goods (originally belonging
               to the pledgor) in his custody for the pledgee and
               constructively makes the goods that of the pledgee.

        4) Lien arises as a result of the lienor's right to possession of the
               asset and not for the purpose of security ab initio but in the
               case of pledge the property is primarily and purposely
               delivered to the pledgee for the purpose of security. As
               regards a mortgage, the mortgagor conveys its general
               property in the asset to the mortgagee as against the pledge
               where what is conveyed is only the special property in the
               property subject to pledge.

        5) The major drawbacks of the pledge as a form of security are
                 o where the attornor gives the pledgor access to the
                    property and the latter deals with it in a way
                    inconsistent with the security interest of the
                    attornee/pledgee, the security is lost, and
                 o if the property is redelivered to the pledgor who parts
                    with possession, the security is lost.

                                                   65
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 2 LIEN AS A FORM OF SECURITY

Unit Structure

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
2.3 Creation of Lien

        2.3.1 Lienee in Possession
        2.3.2 Possession following Exercise of Labour and Skill by

                Lienee
        2.3.3 Possession on Grounds of Custom and Practice
        2.3.4 The Role of Contractual Arrangements
2.4 Forms of Lien
        2.4.1 General Lien
        2.4.2 Specific Lien
2.5 Summary
2.6 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
2.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

2.1 Introduction

Another form of possessory security is the lien, generally defined as a
"right in common law in one person to retain that which is rightfully and
continuously in his possession belonging to another until the present and
accrued claims of the person in possession are satisfied."31 Lien can also
be seen as a person's passive right to retain another's property which in
her possession pending when the demand of the one in possession is
met.32 From the foregoing is it possible to create a lien arising out of
contract? The answer must be in the affirmative. Hence a contractual
lien arises whereby contract a creditor is empowered "to detain the
goods of the debtor to secure payment or performance of some other
obligation, the goods having been delivered to the creditor for some
purpose other than security, such as storage or repair."33

Apart from contractual lien, the debtor never intended that the creditor
should detain its property, since the purpose, in the first place, for
putting the creditor in possession was some other purpose. Just like
pledge, lien depends on the retention of possession. Unlike the pledge,
the lien rights do not avail the lienee with the power to sell where the
debtor defaults. The value of lien as a security device is dependent on
possession, the loss of which effectively destroys the security. The
lienee while in possession has a duty "to look after the assets with
reasonable care and skill," including carrying out reasonable

31 Lien, Entry 802" Halsbury's Laws of England, 5th ed., Vol 8 (2008) p. 5
32 Ugo v Obiekwe (1989) NWLR (Pt 69) 566
33 McKendrick (Ed), p. 628

66
CLL805  MODULE 4

maintenance. However, this duty does not extend "to running the engine
of a lorry, or replacing tyres and batteries, or inspecting regularly as was
held to be satisfied merely by keeping the vehicle in locked premises."34

By its nature, the exercise of lien rights can overreach other person's
security or absolute interests. For example, a bank in a lease finance
structure provides the money for the purchase of motor vehicle. The
vehicle is purchased in the name of the banker, financier. On purchase,
the vehicle is released to the company, while the bank, as the owner,
retained the papers. In this arrangement, the bank is the bailor/creditor
while the company is the bailee/debtor. The latter is entitled, in relation
to the vehicle, to do all things that are reasonably incidental to its
reasonable use. Thus, it is incidental to the use of the vehicle to have it
repaired so as to enable the bailee/debtor to use it in the way in which
such a chattel (vehicle) is ordinarily used.35 Where an artificer who
repaired the vehicle retains it in exercise of lien, the absolute interest of
the bailor/creditor is suspended.

2.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 explain the meaning of pledge and the different types of lien,
 discuss how lien are created,
 analyse the value of lien as a security interest, and
 explain the implications of intervening third party interests
 apply the knowledge you gained to practical situations.

2.3 Creation of Lien Security Interest

A lien can rise under common law,36 by statute;37 or in equity.38 For
example, a company has "a first and paramount lien on every share" not
being a fully paid share (whether currently payable or not) called or
payable at a fixed time in respect of that share, and the company also has
a first and paramount lien on all shares (other than fully paid shares)
standing registered in the name of a single person for all money
presently payable by him or his estate to the company."39 Generally, a
lien can arise under any of the following permissible circumstances:

34 Beale, et al, p. 129
35 Green v All Motors Ltd (1917) 1 KB 625
36 Which arises by agreement or operation of law: Re Bond Worth Ltd
37 For example, see section 5(3) (4) and (10) Admiralty Jurisdiction Act Cap A5 LFN 2004; section
52(1) Civil Aviation Act No. 6 2006, section 164 CAMA 2020; and sections 39, 41, 42 and 43 Sale of
Goods Act 1893.
38 This equates to a case where a lien arises by implication of the law.
39 Section 164 CAMA 2020.

                                                                                            67
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

2.3.1 When the lienee is in possession of the property over
       which the lien is asserted

This is a case where the lienee comes into possession of the property for
a reason other for security. Lien occurs when the lienee retains
possession adverse to the interest of the lienor. This can occur by way of
bailment.

2.3.2 Where the lienee has done some work for or provided
       services to the person who transferred possession to
       him

In this case a mere bailment of the property will not give rise to lien
security. It maturates as soon as the lienee has exercised labour and skill
which led to improving the state of the property.

2.3.3 When the lienee asserts possession on grounds of custom
       and practice of the trade or pursuant to the doctrine of
       common calling

The cases appearing here include "a banker, in relation to all to all
securities coming into his possession as banker; a stockbroker; an
insurance broker; a factor; a solicitor, in relation to client papers coming
into his possession as solicitor."40

2.3.4 Where the lien melds with contractual arrangements
       between the parties

This is typical case of contractual lien and arises where the contract
between the parties supports or upholds, expressly or as can be gleaned
from the contract.

2.4 Forms of Lien

There are different classifications of lien by different writers.41 For our
purposes, we have two types ­ general lien and particular lien:

2.4.1 General Lien

This is said to affect all indebtedness between the parties and arises as a
common law right. From the context of the banker as a creditor, general
lien fastens on "all property belonging to the customer including

40 Beale, et al, p. 125.
41 For example, see Goldface-Irokalibe, p. 114; Sealy and Hooley, p. 1107.

68
CLL805  MODULE 4

negotiable instruments in the banker's hands until his claims against the
customer are discharged".42

2.4.2 Specific Lien

On the other hand, this relates to the indebtedness or other obligation
from a particular transaction involving the parties. In relation to a
banker, it arises in connection with a specific property of the customer
associated with a specified transaction between the banker and his
customer.43 An example here has to do with documentary credit
transactions financed by the bank.

  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 13
  1) A security interest that is capable of fastening on all property

       belonging to the customer including negotiable instruments in

       the banker's hands until his claims against the customer are

       discharged is called-----------

  2) The conditions for exercising the power of retention are--------

  3) Give an example of a statute-based exceptional right of the

       lienee to sale.

  4) A solicitor who becomes a lienee must have done so under what

       circumstances?

  5) Describe any situation where the security interest of the lienee

       can be kept in abeyance.
2.5 Summary

The best way to understand lien as a form of possessory security interest
is to see it as the only instance of lawful expropriation because the lienee
usually come in possession of the property for a reason other than grant
of security by the property owner. Thus, the person (now transformed
into a lienee) distrains the property to secure the payment of the debt due
from the other (that automatically becomes a lienor) to him. There are
two types of general and specific lien. The exercise of the power
(distrain) amounts to enforcement. However, the power to sale is not
available to the lienee, except by contract or pursuant to a statutory
provision, like the Sale of Goods Act.

42 Goldface-Irokalibe, p. 115
43 Goldface-Irokalibe, ibid

                                                                                            69
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

2.6 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Admiralty Jurisdiction Act Cap A5 LFN 2004.
        Civil Aviation Act 2006.

Beale, et al. (2012). Law of Security and Title-based Financing.

Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020.
        Sale of Goods Act 1893.

Goldface-Irokalibe, I.J. (2007). Law of Banking in Nigeria.

McKendrick, E. (Ed). (2010). Goode on Commercial Law.

Sealy and Hooley. (2009). Commercial Law: Text, Cases and Materials.

2.7 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 13

1) General lien.
2) The debt must fall due for payment; and the right to retain must be

        adverse to the right of the lienor A non-adjusting creditor.
3) The Sale of Goods Act 1893 at section 39(1)(c) donates such power.
4) The circumstance is when the lienee asserts possession on grounds of

        custom and practice of the trade or pursuant to the doctrine of common
        calling A credit facility and line of credit, especially in relation to client
        papers coming into his possession as a solicitor.
5) One of the situations where the security interest of the lienee may be
        suspended or kept in abeyance is where third party exercises
        encumbrancing lien rights over the same property subject to a lien. An
        example relates to lease finance by a bank. Where the debtor goes to the
        artificer to carry out maintenance on the motor vehicle who detains the
        same until he has been paid for his services, the right of the bank (being
        in possession of the title to the vehicle) is at this point suspended.

70
CLL805  MODULE 4

UNIT 3 MORTGAGES

Unit Structure

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
3.3 A Brief History of Mortgages
3.4 Forms of Mortgages

        3.4.1 Legal Mortgages
        3.4.2 Equitable Mortgages
3.5 The Concept of Equity of Redemption
         3.5.1 Examples of Cases Giving Rise to Clog in the Equity of

                Redemption
         3.5.2 Exceptions to Clog in the Equity of Redemption
3.6 Distinction between a Mortgage and a Charge
3.7 Summary
3.8 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
3.9 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction

As noted earlier, the early beginnings of non-possessory security were
greeted with scepticism and distrust. This was understandably justifiable
since there was no system publicity in place. With the development of
the registry system where the public are afforded the privilege of notice
of the extent of encumbrance over the assets of a debtor and the priority
regime, secured credit hinged on non-possessory has become, today, the
fuel of credit and efficient measure of the soundness of a financial
system. The non-possessory security which may be taken over all asset
types, present and future, of the debtor are the mortgage and charge.

In this Module, the focus is specifically on the mortgage. A mortgage
has been defined "a conveyance or oilier disposition of land designed to
secure the payment of money or the discharge of some other
obligation."44 It is equally defined as "an agreement which may be
expressed by deed between persons in which a borrower of a sum of
money puts up his property as collateral for the money given with the
understanding that the property will be conveyed back to him upon the
repayment of the money and any interests on it.45 In other words, the
mortgage is a security created to transfer an interest in the property
coeval or subsidiary to the proprietary interest of the owner of the

44 Ahaneku V Iheaturu [1995] 2 NWLR (Pt. 380) 758
45 Dadem, Y.Y., Property Law Practice in Nigeria, 2nd ed, Jos: University Press (2012) p. 135

                                                                                            71
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

property (usually the debtor) for the payment of debt or performance of
an obligation.

      The interest created by the mortgage is coeval to that of the
      mortgagor where it is legal mortgage; it is subsidiary where the
      interest transferred is equitable. The condition for the transfer is
      that the interest, equal or subsidiary, will be re-transferred to the
      debtor on the discharge of his obligation. Naturally, a mortgage
      enjoys certain characteristics. It is a consensual arrangement
      between the parties (mortgagor/debtor and mortgagee/creditor). As
      hinted earlier, it can be created over tangible and intangible
      property. It conveys an interest equal or subsidiary to the debtor's
      interest. The interest so conveyed, whether equal or subsidiary, is
      defeasible. Generally, the discussion of mortgage here relates to all
      species of assets capable of being offered as a mortgage.

3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 discuss the history and importance of mortgage as a form of
        security

 undertake a critical appraisal of the principles that underlie the
        mortgage as a form of security, be able to ask questions and
        provide the right answers

 deploy the mechanism of mortgage to practical situations.

3.3 A Brief History of Mortgages

Noting that "a pledge in customary law is akin in some respects to
mortgage in common law", Muntaka-Coomasie, JCA in Ahaneku v
Iheaturu (supra) provided a brief but interesting history of the
mortgage:46

              The developed law of mortgages is the joint product
              of common law. equity and statute. In the earliest
              days of the common law a mortgage was a mere
              pledge, which took one of two forms. It might be
              agreed that the lender should enter into possession of
              the land and should take the rents and profits in
              discharge of both the principal and the interest of the
              loan. This was called a Vivumn Vadium, or "living
              pledge," since it automatically and by its own force

46 You are strongly advised to review our previous modules on possessory security (the pledge and
lien) and attempt to discover the differences between mortgage from other transactions like the
pledge and lien.

72
CLL805  MODULE 4

              discharged the entire debt. But, on the other hand, the
              arrangement might be that the lender should take the
              rents and profits of the land in discharge of the
              interest only, in which case the transaction was called
              a Mortuum Vadium, a dead pledge, since it did not
              effect the gradual extinction of the debt.

        However, later developments saw land being conveyed in fee
        simple to the mortgagee on condition that if the loan was repaid
        upon due date the mortgagor must repossess but if the mortgagor
        fails, the interest of the mortgagee becomes absolute and the
        mortgagee's interest extinguished thereby. Noting the hardship
        this worked, the court observed that "what made the hardship on
        the debtor a glaring one was that the debt still remained unpaid
        and could be recovered from the feoffor47 notwithstanding that he
        had actually forfeited the land to his mortgagee."48 That is, either
        way the debtor/mortgagee loses and suffers double jeopardy: he
        loses his property for falling in breach of the contract he made;
        and the loss of his property is not bar to his liability to still pay
        and discharge the debt.

        Interestingly, equity intervened to discover the essence of
        mortgage, which is to "afford security to the lender, and as long
        as the security remains intact there is no justification for
        expropriating the property of the mortgagor merely because of his
        failure to make prompt payment." Lord Nottingham reechoed this
        essence when he stated that "in natural justice and equity the
        principal right of the mortgagee is to the money, and his right to
        the land is only as a security for the money."49 The courts of
        equity delivered the rule that time not being of the essence of the
        mortgage transaction, the mortgagor must be allowed to redeem,
        albeit he fell in breach. Consequently, "upon the date fixed for
        repayment, the mortgagor has at common law a contractual right
        to redeem. If this date passes without repayment, he obtains a
        right to redeem in equity."50

47 One who gives, grants or bestows a fee. In this sense, it refers to the debtor who made the grant
in fee simple.
48 Kreglinger v. New Patagonia Meat and (old Storage Co. Ltd. (1914) A.C.25, Per Lord Haldane at
page 35: Cited in Ahaneku v Iheaturu (supra)
49 Thornbrough v. Baker (1675) 3 SWANS
50 Ahaneku v Iheaturu (supra)

                                                                                            73
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.4 Forms of Mortgages

Two types of mortgages are capable of being created: legal and
equitable.

3.4.1 Legal Mortgages

In defining a mortgage as the creation of an interest of a defeasible
nature in property for the payment of a debt, the Nigerian Court went on
to pronounce on the nature and effect of a legal mortgage:

The legal consequence of the above definition is that the owner of
the mortgaged property becomes divested of the right to dispose
of it until he has secured a release of the property from the
mortgagee." Thus, in a legal mortgage, title to the property is
transferred to the mortgagee subject to the proviso that the
mortgaged property would be reconveyed by the mortgagor to the
mortgagee upon the performance of the conditions stipulated in
the mortgage deed and upon payment of the debt at the time
stipulated therein.51

In terms of creation, legal mortgages involve the execution of a deed
under seal. While it is not in doubt that the proprietary right of the
mortgagor is conveyed to the mortgagee,52 that interest of the
mortgagee, now called security interest, is always subject to the
mortgagor's equity of redemption. The deed of legal mortgage may be
created under common law or under a statute53 or both. For example,
under common law a legal mortgage of a fee simple where the
mortgagor conveys the whole of his beneficial interest to the mortgagee
with a covenant to reconvey the estate on repayment of the debt. A legal
mortgage can be taken over real and personal property.

3.4.2 Equitable Mortgages

This is an agreement to enter into a legal mortgage, evidenced by
deposit of title deeds by way of security without a memorandum.
According to the Court Appeal in Akanmode v. FBN:

51 Atiba Iyalamu Savings & Loans Ltd v Sidiku Ajalasuberu & Anor (2018) LPELR-44069(SC). Also see,
North Vs Bello (2000) 7 NWLR (Pt. 664) 244; Prince Abdul Rasheeed Adetono v Zenith International
Bank Plc (2011) 18 NWLR (Pt.1279) 627
52 In Re First Bank of Nigeria Limited, Suit No: FHC/L/CS/550/2015 (Delivered on 13/5/2016) the Federal
High Court, relying on the authority of Okuneye v F.B.N. plc (1996) 6 NWLR (Pt. 457) 749, stated that
"a legal mortgage transfers title in the property to the mortgagee."
53 For instance, the Conveyancing Act 1883, the Property and Conveyancing Law 1959 and the Land
Use Act Cap L5 LFN 2004 regulate and substantially impact the creation of legal mortgages.

74
CLL805  MODULE 4

                     when there is a deposit of titled documents
                     with a clear intention that they should serve
                     as security for a loan granted; when there is
                     an agreement to create a legal mortgage in
                     respect of a facility; or when there is a mere
                     equitable charge of the mortgagor's property,
                     then an equitable mortgage is created.54

                In Daily Times v. Skye Bank (2017) LPELR-
                43539(CA) held that "it is trite that deposit of title deeds
                with a bank as security for a loan creates an equitable
                mortgage as against legal mortgage." It is also possible to
                create equitable mortgage by agreement that manifests the
                clear intention of the parties. The intention in this regard is
                manifested if it is supported by consideration. It can also
                be created by "a present mortgage of an equitable interest
                (and it arises) where there is already a legal mortgage."55
                Such a mortgage is a shaky one, especially where full
                disclosure was not made to the creditor and where there is
                full disclosure it will always be subordinated the legal
                mortgage.

3.5 The Concept of Equity of Redemption

In Ejikeme v. Okonkwo & Anor56, the Supreme Court stated:

             It is a settled rule of equity that any agreement
             which directly bars the mortgagor's right to
             redemption is ineffectual. Similarly, stipulations
             which even indirectly tend to have the effect of
             making a mortgage irredeemable are equally void
             and unenforceable as clogging the equity of
             redemption, a doctrine which applies to all types of
             mortgages, whether legal or equitable.

      Further, the Court of Appeal added that:

             The law is settled that the equity of redemption of
             the mortgagor cannot be activated unless and until
             the mortgagor make full repayment of loan
             advance(d) to it by the mortgagee. It follows
             therefore, that the mortgagor who has not made any
             repayment cannot complain that there is a clog in

54 (2018) LPELR-44456(CA).
55 Onamson, p. 143
56 [1994] 8 NWLR (Pt. 362) 266, Per Uwais, JSC

                                                                                            75
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

      his equity of redemption when he has not made any
      actual repayment.57

Equity of redemption maturates and is activated after the
contractual right to redeem is exhausted by reason of failure of the
mortgagor to meet the obligations of the loan as it fell due. Given
that the equity of the mortgagor arises when the contractual right to
redeem has been lost due to failure meet the debt obligations, do
you think the position of the Court of Appeal is well founded? The
statement of the Court of Appeal is deserving of qualification to
the extent that the equity of redemption is activated after the loss of
contractual to right to redeem and subject to the condition that the
debtor/mortgagor has taken steps to make full repayment of the
loan. Preferable is the statement of the Supreme Court that "a
mortgagor has a legal (as against equitable) right to redeem his
property once the mortgaged debt is fully paid.58 When this is
done the mortgagee should issue the mortgagor a Deed of release."
(Emphasis added) From this perspective, one can appreciate the
view of the Supreme Court in N.A.S. Ltd v UBA plc that "the
equity of redemption in mortgage transactions is a strong point in
equity and it cannot be lightly vitiated."59

Generally, the right to redeem cannot be taken away even by an
expressed consent by parties that the mortgage is not to be
redeemed or that the right is to be continued to a particular time or
to a particular description of persons. Except extinguished by sale
or foreclosure, the right continues.60 Always bear in mind that the
right to redeem is not the same thing as equity of redemption. It is
possible to find for a clog in the equity of redemption of the
mortgagor from a provision in the deed comprising the mortgage.
In such a case the court should find no hesitation to strike the
clause down as a clog. Despite the ruling of the Court of Appeal, it
is submitted that where a mortgagor has paid up the facility within
the tenure and in compliance with the conditions but the mortgagee
refuses to release the security, what is disturbed is not the equity of
redemption, but the contractual right to redeem, of the mortgagor.

57 Amsel Ltd & Anor v. UBN plc (2017) LPELR-42980(CA), per Shuaibu JCA
58 Jolasun V. Bamgboye (2010) LPELR-1624(SC)
59 (2005) 14 NWLR (PT. 945) 421
60 Mohammed v. Abdulkadir & Ors (2007) LPELR-8994(CA)

76
CLL805  MODULE 4

3.5.1 Examples of Cases Giving Rise to Clog in the Equity of
       Redemption

The following are circumstances capable constituting a clog in the
equity of redemption of the mortgagor include the following:

1) Particularly with respect to a mortgage between individuals, a
        provision postponing redemption perpetually or if its oppressive
        and unconscionable or designed to create an unreasonable
        restraint of trade may be struck down as a clog.61 However, this
        may not apply to companies by reason of statutory provision to
        the contrary.62

2) Any provision in the deed of legal mortgage that makes
        redemption subject to onerous conditions may be cited for
        clogging the equity of redemption and thus likely to be set aside.
        Instances of such provisions include a penal clause and a
        condition that is repugnant and unconscionable.

3) Provision restricting the recovery of original mortgaged assets is
        bad for a clog because it is capable of conferring collateral
        advantages on the mortgagee. An example is where the
        mortgagee is given the option to purchase the asset on
        redemption.63

3.5.2 Exceptions to Clog in the Equity of Redemption

Apparent situations which do not constitute a clog on the equity of
redemption include:

1) Compliance with a statutory provision, even if it will unfairly
        prejudice the equity of the mortgagor, does not amount to a clog
        in the equity of redemption.64

2) Charging of interest over and above initial rate in the life of the
        loan is not a clog, provided it accords with the prevailing interest
        rate regime.65

3.6 Distinction between a Mortgage and a Charge

The discussion on security interest created by way of charge is deferred
to the Module on "Company Securities". A charge is a form of
consensual security and may be fixed or floating. On enforcement, the
remedies of a chargee, as will be seen in due course appear limited

61 Beale, et al, p. 156
62 Section 196 CAMA 2020
63 Samuel v Jarah Timber and Wood Paving Corporation Ltd (1904) AC 323
64 Amsel Nigeria Ltd v UBN plc (supra)
65 Ibid

                                                                                            77
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

when compared with that available to a mortgagee. For our purposes at
this point, Ferran drew a distinction between charge and mortgage:

        Every equitable mortgage is also an equitable charge
        but the converse is not true; a mortgage, like a charge,
        appropriates property for the payment of a debt or the
        discharge of an obligation but a mortgage goes further
        than a charge and also operates to transfer ownership in
        equity to the creditor, subject to the chargor's equity of
        redemption. A charge gives its holder rights in relation
        to the property which is the subject-matter of the
        security but does not effect a transfer of the legal or
        beneficial ownership of that property. (...) A charge is
        a form of equitable security.

                        SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 15
        a) The common law set up the mortgagee as the lord of the manor

            and vested him with powers to take the best of all worlds where
            the mortgagor falls in breach. The irresistible force of equity
            came to the rescue. How did it achieve this?
        b) At what point in the life of the security does the equity of
            redemption of the mortgagor said to arise?
        c) Apart from creation by mere deposit of title deeds, what other
            way do you think equitable mortgage can be created?
        d) In the case of Thornbrough v. Baker (1675) a profound statement
            that go to the heart of equity intervention in the area of security
            interest created by way of mortgage. What is this statement and
            who made it?
        e) Mortgaged under common law meted out hardship to the
            mortgagor. Can you identify the egregious form of the injustice?

78
CLL805  MODULE 4

     f) List, without explaining, two types of charge known to you.
     g) XYZ Bank Ltd made and placed a report on the central server.

         The reports states ABC Enterprises is indebted to the XYZ Bank.
         This was in line with the regulation from the Central Bank of
         Nigeria requiring all banks to make and place such reports of
         every high-risk debtor of the bank. ABC Enterprises desires to
         liquidate the loan from XYZ bank and approached 5G Bank plc
         for financial accommodation. 5G Bank checked the central server
         and of course saw the report on ABC Enterprises. As a result, it
         declined to grant the loan facility. ABC Enterprises has sued XYZ
         Bank insisting that such a report is a clog on its equity of
         redemption. What do you think?

3.7 Summary

The mortgage and charge are non-possessory security. The mortgage
grants the absolute interest of the mortgagor to the mortgagee, The
common law mortgage worked hardship against the mortgagor.
However, equity intervened to give reprieve the mortgagor so that his
equity of redemption remains intact even if he breached the conditions of
the mortgage as to prompt payment. Thus, equity of redemption is
another critical aspect of the mortgage that makes it possible for certain
covenants in a deed of legal mortgage to be struck down if they amount
to a clog in the equity of redemption of the mortgagor.

3.8 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020.

Land Use Act 2004.

Property and Conveyancing Law 1959.

Beale, et al. (2012). The Law of Security and Title-based Financing.

Dadem, Y.Y. (2012). Property Law Practice in Nigeria, 2nd ed, Jos: University
          Press.

Onamson, F.O. (2017). Law and Creditor Protection in Nigeria.

                                                                                             79
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.9 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 15

a) Equity achieved this by allowing security created by way of
    mortgage but insisted that, unlike the common law, the property
    subject to security cannot be taken away from the mortgagor merely
    for failure to make prompt payment.

b) The equity of redemption of the mortgagor arises when the debtor
    has lost the contractual right to redeem.

c) Equitable mortgage can be created by a present mortgage of an
    equitable interest that usually arises where there is already a legal
    mortgage on the same property.

d) The statement is "in natural justice and equity the principal right of
    the mortgagee is to the money, and his right to the land is only as a
    security for the money." It was made by Lord Nottingham.

e) The hardship on the mortgage was that when the debtor falls behind
    in paying the debt, he would forfeit the property and still be liable to
    pay the debt.

f) The types of charges known to me are fixed charge and floating
    charge.

g) While there are grounds which, if present, could amount to a clog on
    the equity of redemption of ABC Enterprises, the action of XYZ
    Bank Ltd does not fall within those cases. This is because
    compliance with a statutory provision does not amount to a clog even
    if it will have deleterious effect on the mortgagor's equity of
    redemption.

80
CLL805  MODULE 4

UNIT 3 ENFORCEMENT OF FORM-BASED SECURITY
INTERESTS

Unit Structure
3.1 Introduction
3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
3.3 Enforcement of the Pledge Contract

        3.3.1 Nature of the Interest of Pledgee
        3.3.2 Parties to a Pledge Contract
        3.3.3 Properties Amenable to Pledge Contract
3.4 Enforcement of Contract of Lien
        3.4.1 Delivery
        3.4.2 Conditions for Constructive Delivery
3.5 Enforcement of Mortgages
         3.5.1 Possession of the Security
         3.5.2 Sale of the Property
         3.5.3 Foreclosure of the Security
3.6 Summary
3.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
3.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction

The nature of the creditor's interest in the pledge is the special property
in the goods subject to the pledge. This affects the extent of rights
available to him when there is default by the debtor and the creditor
needs to realise the security. The only power available to the creditor is
the power of sale. The creditor must ensure that the power is exercised
properly and must therefore seek answers to such issues as when to
exercise the power of sale, how to exercise the power and after sale how
do you deal with the proceeds of sale?

On the other hand, considering how the lienee come about his
possession, it is important to note that he is not conferred with a right of
possession thereby. Accordingly, his right is limited to retention of the
property of the lienor and does not include right to sell

3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

 state the various powers of the pledgee and how to enforce the
        pledge contract where an event of default occasions

 discuss when and how to exercise the power of a lienee.

        81
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.3 Enforcement of the Pledge Contract

3.3.1 When to Exercise the Power of Sale

This power can arise when the debtor is in breach of any of the
conditions (including condition as to payment of interest and principal)
of the loan (known as events of default); or where no time is specified
for payment, the pledgee serves on the pledgor reasonable notice to pay
and the power remains active even when the demand for repayment is
inaccurate and excessive.66 Why should the law adopt this stand? It is
simply because the obligation to pay is not the same thing as what to
pay.

However, it is important to note that this power does not avail the
pledgee of land in Nigeria. That is, the pledgor's right of redemption
cannot be choked out by the customary pledgee. How do you think the
equity of the pledgor can be clogged? It occurs where the pledgee makes
a demand for:

      any amount in excess of the sum for which the lad was
      originally pledged, or by planting the pledged land heavily
      with economic trees, or by using other subterfuges to delay or
      postpone the pledgor's or his successor's right to redeem.67

Under the Nigerian customary law the pledge of land is equivalent to a
mortgage of land; and for this reason, it has been held that "if a
transaction is expressed to be a pledge per se in return for a loan of an
amount of money the land is clearly redeemable however long it may be
in the possession of the pledgee."68

3.3.2 How to Exercise the Power of Sale

This can be exercised in two ways. The pledgee can sell on his own
account. This is usually by virtue of an implied authority from the
pledgor and for the benefit of both parties.69 The pledgee may apply for
judicial sale of the property subject pledge. Such an application fetters
the discretion of the pledgee to sell the property while the application is
pending, because of the doctrine of lis pendens.70

66 Goldface-Irokalibe, n. 21 above, p.128; Beale, et al, n. 115 above, p. 563; Stubbs v Slatter
(1910) 1 Ch 632
67 Okoiko v Esadalue & Anor (supra)
68 Yashe v Umar (supra)
69 The Odessa (supra)
70 Goldface-Irokalibe, n. 21 above, p. 129

82
CLL805  MODULE 4

3.3.3 How to Deal with the Proceeds of Sale

The pledgee must account for any excess or surplus after satisfying the
sums secured by the pledge. In other words, the pledgee is a constructive
trustee of the pledgor in respect of the surplus.71 Impliedly, where there
is a shortfall, "the pledgee can bring an action for the outstanding
balance after applying the proceeds of the sale" towards settling the loan
and incidental costs.72

3.4 Enforcement of Lien Security

3.3.1 The power to retain

The power of the lienee to detain and retain the goods of another is
based on his right to have his demands against the owner of the property
satisfied.73 What are the conditions for exercise of the right to retain
possession? The debt must fall due for payment. The right to retain must
be adverse to the right of the lienor.74 Notice to pay the amount due must
have been served on the lienor.75

3.3.2 The power to sale

As a rule, the power of sale does not inure to the lienee. Thus, any
dealing by way of sale is inconsistent with the security feature of lien
and can attract action in conversion to the full value of the goods against
the lienee. Notwithstanding, the power of sale can arise by contract or
pursuant to a statutory provision. An instance is the statutory power of
sale available to an unpaid seller as a lienee under section 39(1)(c) of the
Sale of Goods Act 1893.

3.5 Enforcement of Mortgage Security

3.5.1 Possession of the Security

The sanctity of the right to possession is expressed in the statement that
it can be exercised even before the ink is dry on the mortgage unless
there is something in the contract, express or implied whereby the

71 Ibid, p, 129; Matthew v TM Sutton Ltd (1994) 1 WLR 1455
72 Jones v Marshall (1899) 24 QBD 269
73 Ugo v Obiekwe (supra)
74 Tappendum v Artus (1964) 2 QB 185
75 On the special considerations that arise in a particular lien against a general lien, see Onamson, n.
10 above, p. 265

                                                                                            83
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

mortgagee has contracted himself out of that right.76 What does the
foregoing tell you about possession? It means that the power can be
varied by contract. For example, the mortgagor is entitled to reasonable
time to the meet the before possession is exercise, if the debt is payable
on demand.77 Would it be right to state that a mortgagor that exercised
the right as soon as the deed of legal mortgage is executed by the parties
places himself in a position of pledgee? It is not necessarily the case
because possession constitutes the pledge and not an enforcement of the
pledge. The mortgagee may not want to be paid in driblets,78 but it
enters into possession because it attached primacy to payment of interest
as against the principal sum, it cannot escape being so paid. The power
of possession does not inure to the holder of equitable mortgage as well
as a mere chargee.79 The appointment of a receiver sidesteps this
limitation. What are the consequences of being in possession?

1) The Mortgage Likely to be Reduced in Driblets

The mortgagee that goes into possession must apply the income
produced by the property in reducing the amount of the debt. It is
immaterial that the mortgagee will realise the debt in insignificant
instalments.80

2) Duty to Account Arises

In the context of the profits derivable from the property, the mortgagee
must exercise utmost diligence with reference to the profits derived from
the property while the mortgagee is in possession. The duty to account is
strict and may include liability for all money which "but for the wilful
default" of the mortgagee must have been made.

3) Duty to Repair the Property

The mortgagee has a duty to repair the property. While in possession the
property must skid into disrepair. However, there is a difference
between undertaking repairs and carrying out extensive improvements
tantamount to improving the mortgagor out of his estate. The latter is
usually discouraged by the courts

76 Four Maids Ltd v Dudley Marshall (Properties) Ltd (1957) Ch 317
77 Toms v Wilson (1863) 4 B&S 442; Beale, et al, n. 115 above, p. 574
78 Wellington v Papafio (1952) 14 WACA 49
79 Gwarzo v. Mohammed & Anor (2012) LPELR-22375(CA)
80 Ibid

84
CLL805  MODULE 4

3.5.2 Sale of the Security

The power of sales by implication, under statute81 or by agreement.
Apart from availing a legal mortgage, the power is available to an
equitable mortgagee created by deed. However, an equitable mortgagee
simpliciter could only sell by an order of court.82 Certain events precede
the exercise of the power of sale. They are highlighted below:

1) The Option to Sell

The option to sell the property subject to mortgage is that of the
mortgagee to make, especially as the mortgagee is not holding that
power as a trustee of anyone, not even the mortgagor. In fact, the court
stated the power of sale is for the benefit of the mortgagee and the court
will not interfere with its exercise: provided no corruption or fraud or
collusion between the mortgagee and purchaser is disclosed83 Despite
this, the equity of the mortgagor is not extinguished except by effective
sale or foreclosure absolute. Is there any possibility that the mortgagor
faced with extreme difficulty in repaying the mortgage sum could
overreach the power of the mortgagee? The only option available to the
mortgagor is to approach the court for an order of sale.84 A sale at the
behest of the mortgagor is more beneficial because of the prospects of
better return. This is unlike mortgagee-conducted sale that could led to
issues of bad faith, collusion, fraud and other incidences that may
impeach the sale.

2) The Conditions for Sale

The mortgagee must serve on the mortgagor the requisite notice. He
must exercise good faith in the exercise of the power.85 Examples of bad
faith include where there is collusion between the mortgagee and the
purchaser,86 where the sale price was abysmally low,87 or where the
mortgagee exercised the power after the expiry of the legal due date or
the instalment has not fallen due to payment,88 or the presence of
conflict between the parties likely to distort or capable of distorting the
totality of the transaction. However, the mortgagee owes a duty to the

81 Such a statutory power of sale makes provision for service of notice on the mortgagor requiring
notice and default has been made in complying with the notice: section 125 Property and
Conveyancing Law 1959; section 20 Conveyancing Act 1881 and section 125 Kaduna State Property
Law 1990
82 The Ibadan Division of the Federal High Court confirmed this position in the case of FMBN V. Coop
Property Development Company, Suit No: FHC/IB/CS/99/2015 (Delivered 8/1/2018)
83 Warner v Jacob (1882) LR 2 ChD 220. In Chukwuokeke v. Nigeria Agricultural Co-Op & Rural Devt
Bank Ltd & Ors (2018) LPELR-45037(CA),.
84 Section 114 PCL 1959; section 91(2) English Law of Property Act 1925
85 Alaede v. Eco Bank (Nig) Ltd & Ors (2015) LPELR-25875(CA)
86 Ibid.
87 Mohammed v Abdulkadir (2008) 4 NWLR (Pt 1076) 111
88 N.H.D.S. Ltd v Mumuni & Or (1977) 2 SC 57

                                                                                            85
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

mortgagor and those claiming under or through him (subsequent
incumbrancers, sureties and those interested in the equity of redemption)
to obtain a true market value, not necessarily the best price.89 The
mortgagee may wish to exercise the power through an agent, like an
auctioneer. Whether the sale is by public auction or private treaty, the
agent or auctioneer must comply with the law.90

3) The Effects of the Sale

When the mortgagee exercises the power, the consequences from the act
of sale include the following:

1) Effective sale extinguishes the equity of redemption of the
        mortgagor.91

2) If the power is improperly exercised so that the mortgagee is said
        to have acted in breach of the duty of good faith, the mortgagee
        becomes liable in damages to the mortgagor. This is on the
        principle that the courts are not prepared rewrite the contract for
        the parties.92 The power is exercised improperly, for example,
        where requisite notice was not given or where the sale was
        concluded in the presence of a conflict. The measure of damages
        in a case of improper exercise of the power is the value of the
        property less the actual amount which the mortgagor owed the
        mortgagee.93

3) Where the sale returned an amount higher than the indebtedness
        of the mortgagor, the mortgagee must account for the surplus.
        According to Kay J, even if there is no express trust in respect of
        the surplus, there is undoubtedly fiduciary relationship between
        the mortgagor and the mortgagee. This transforms the mortgagee
        a constructive trustee of the surplus.94

4) Inversely, the right of the mortgagee to sue for any deficit is not
        taken away following an effective sale. Thus, where the proceeds
        is insufficient to liquidate the indebtedness, the mortgagee has the
        right to sue for the balance.

4) Grounds for Impeaching the Sale

Where the mortgagee exercises his power of sale, either in line with the
agreement or under the statute, it can be impeached on the following
grounds:

89 Beale, et al, p. 581
90 For example, see section 19 Auctioneers Law Cap 12 Laws of Eastern Nigeria 1961
91 Sections 111 and 112 PCL 1959
92 Section 126 PCL 1959; section 21 CA 1881
93 Pinnock v GB Ollivant & Co Ltd (1934) 2 WACA 164
94 Banner v Berridge (1880) LR 18 ChD 254. On this, see section 127 PCL 1959; section 21(3) CA 1881

86
CLL805                                               MODULE 4

1) A sale can be set aside where the title of the mortgagor is
        defective.

2) A sale can be impeached if the conduct was tainted with fraud.
3) If the sale was after the mortgagor had discharged the entire debt

        secured by the mortgage, it will be set aside.95
4) It can be voided if the sale was not conducted at arm's length so

        that the it will be sold at a ridiculously low price96 as against a
        proper price.

3.5.3   Foreclosure of the Security

Both the holders of legal mortgage as well as equitable mortgage can
exercise this power. It is also available to the chargee, debenture holder
or a trustee under a debenture trust deed.97 The mechanism of
foreclosure when exercised satisfies the mortgagor's entire and
outstanding obligation. This means the power to sue for any shortfall is
taken away.

1) To Whom and when is Foreclosure Said to be Available?

It is available to the legal as well as equitable mortgagee. It is not
available to a mere chargee, since no interest is conveyed.98 A dispute as
to the outstanding amount is not a bar to the exercise of the power of
foreclosure that has arisen. The right of foreclosure arises when the
mortgagor's legal right to redeem has come to an end: that is when the
payment becomes due at law and the mortgagor fails to pay. Beale et al
states that payment is due "either by the date agreed for redemption or
earlier if the proviso for redemption is conditional upon the performance
of a covenant that is breached."

2) What are the steps for the grant of foreclosure?

The remedy of foreclosure involves a two-step process. The first step is
an application before the court for an order nisi, which if granted would
not usually exceed six months. It is commenced by way of originating
summons.99 The effect of the grant of an order nisi is that the right of the
mortgagee to sell the property is suspended. If the mortgagor fails to
redeem within the period allowed for redemption by reason of the order
nisi, the court will make the foreclosure order absolute. An order

95 Oguchi v FMBN Ltd (1990) 6 NWLR (pt 155) 335
96 Taiwo v Adegboro (1997) 11 NWLR (Pt 528) 224
97 Generally, the subject of charge and debenture are considered in the next semester under
company securities.
98 A charge is an appropriation of asset for the settlement of an indebtedness. As will be
seen, the strict way of enforcing a charge is by sale or appointment of a receiver
99 Order 59 Lagos State High Court (Civil Procedure) Rules 2019.

                                                                                            87
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

absolute, being the final step, carries with it an order for possession of
the security, with the result that the mortgage takes the property in full
satisfaction of the mortgage debt. In exceptional cases, the court,
exercising its discretion in that behalf, can, on the application of any
party before the making of the order, order that the property be sold as
against grant of the order absolute.

3) Incidental Matters Relating to Foreclosure

Once an order of foreclosure absolute has been made and considering
the extinguishing effect it unleashes on the mortgagor's equity of
redemption, the question becomes whether:

1) It can be reopened so as to revive the extinguished equity of the
        mortgagor;

2) The position of subsequent and prior encumbrancers would be
        affected, and if so to what extent are they so affected; and

3) In the case of an equitable mortgagee that foreclosed, it would
        require the consent of the Governor before it can be vested
        with the absolute title of the mortgagor.

It is possible to reopen the foreclosure on a reason acceptable to the
court. Or the mortgagee, unknowingly but to its own hurt, may reopen
the foreclosure. For example, if the mortgagee instead of selling the
property as an absolute owner sells as a mortgagee. Another case where
it may be reopened by the act of the mortgagee is if it takes out an action
against the mortgagor on the covenant for the outstanding balance of the
loan.100

100 For an exhaustive treatment of the issues, see Onamson, pp. 277-280

88
CLL805  MODULE 4

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 14

1) Where the pledgee exercises the power of sale and there is a shortfall,
     what option(s) are open to him in such a situation?

2) What are the ways by which the power of sale can be exercised by a
     desirous pledgee?

3) Where the pledgee applies for judicial sell, what is the consequence of
     his action?

4) The general rule is that the power of sale is not available to the
     lienee. Can you discover and provide any exceptions to this rule?

5) What is the difference between possession with respect to a
     mortgage as against a pledge?

6) A mortgagee has the inalienable right to enforce the security
     even before the ink is dry on the mortgage. This may be the case,
     but it is not without its corollary. Do you agree?

7) How can a foreclosure order absolute be reopened?
8) ABC Commercial Bank Ltd obtained foreclosure order absolute

     against the property of Zeetop Ventures. After subsequent sale, it
     recovered less than what Zeetop owed. What options are open to
     ABC Commercial Bank Ltd?
9) When a sale by the mortgagee is impeached, what do you think
     must be at issue here?

3.6 Summary

With respect to enforcement, the power available to the pledgee is the
power of sale, which becomes exercisable after the debt has fallen due
and remained unpaid or the pledgee has fallen into breach with respect to
the conditions of the loan. As was seen in a case, the power of sale is not
available with respect to customary pledge of land. In line with the
indicia of security interest, where the money realised is above the amount
outstanding the pledgee must account to the pledgor for the balance and
vice versa. The avenues through which the mortgage can be enforced are
brought out clearly to you. They include the right of possession, sale and
foreclosure. As to possession, the mortgagee runs certain risks and rarely
exercises this right. With respect to sale, once exercised, it is effective
and extinguishes the equity of redemption of the mortgagor. However, a
sale can be impeached for certain reasons, like fraud. On foreclosure, it

                                                                                            89
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

involves a two-step process; the first is application for order nisi; the
second is the application for order absolute.

3.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 14

 1) The pledgee can bring an action for the outstanding balance after applying
      the proceeds of the sale.

 2) The pledgee may sell on his own account; or he may apply judicial sale.
 3) The effect is that the pledgee fetters his own discretion to sell while the

      application is pending.
 4) An exception is where the power of sale can arise by contract or pursuant

      to a statutory provision. An instance is the statutory power of sale
      available to an unpaid seller as a lienee under section 39(1)(c) of the Sale
      of Goods Act 1893.
 5) The difference is that in the case of a mortgage possession constitutes
      enforcement of the security; while as regards a pledge, it constitutes the
      pledge itself.

  6) I agree. However, the result of such a step is that (a) the mortgagee will be
      paid in driblets; (b) the mortgagee must exercise diligence with respect to
      profits realized from the property while in possession; and (c) the
      mortgage has a duty of repair of the property without necessarily
      improving the mortgagee out of its estate.

  7) It can be reopened upon a reason acceptable to the court being shown by
      the mortgagor, and by an act of the mortgagee.

  8) There is no option open to the Bank. This is because the effect of
      foreclosure is that the creditor/mortgagee cannot sue the debtor/mortgagor
      for any balance if less than the amount owed is recovered. The same is the
      case where a higher amount is recovered.

  9) The issue that may inform a sale being impeached is that (i) the title of the
      mortgagee is defective; (ii) the sale was tainted with fraud; (iii) the sale
      was after the mortgagee had discharged the mortgage debt; and (iv) the
      sale was not at arm's length.

90
CLL805                                                   MODULE 5

MODULE 5  FUNCTIONAL SECURITY INTEREST1

Unit 1    Creation
Unit 2    Perfection
Unit 3    Registration
Unit 4    Enforcement

UNIT 1 CREATION
Unit Structure
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
1.3 Formal vs Functional Security Interests
1.4 Creation of Functional Security Interest

        1.4.1 Agreement between the Parties
        1.4.2 Interest of the Debtor in the Asset
        1.4.3 Formal Contents of the Security Agreement
        1.4.4 Identification of the Collateral
1.5 Summary
1.6 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
1.7 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

1.1 Introduction

The functional (or "In-Substance") classification of security interests
provided by the Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017, as
pointed out earlier, is based on conceptual foundations of the United
States Unifrom Commercial Code Article 9 (UCC Art 9) and the
UNCITRAL Legislative Guide on Secured Transactions.2 The In-
Substance system of security interests promoted and adopted by many
jurisdictions, including Nigeria, is transplant of the UCC Art 9.

As you will see in the module, the touchstone of functional security
interests is its unitary conception of security device. The functional
security interest does not replace the form-based or common law
security interests system. Rather it represents another way by which
security interests are classified, understood and applied by different
jurisdictions. It construes security interest from the point of the
"function it performs" as against the form it takes.3 There appears to be

1 For a thorough treatment of functional security interest based on unitary concept under the
Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017, see the following works: Kieninger, E.M. (Ed).
(2004) Security Rights in Movable Property in European Private Law. CUP, United Kingdom; Bridge,
M. (2015). Personal Property Law, Fourth Edition. OUP, United Kingdom; Dubovec, M. and Kambili,
C. (2015). A guide to the Personal Property Act: The Casse of Malawi. PULP, South Africa; and
Ozekhome, M.A.A. (2017). Personal Property Law in Nigeria. PULP, South Africa.
2 Dubovec and Kambili (2015), ibid, p. vii and Ozekhome (2017), ibid, p. vi.,
3 Ozekhome (2017), ibid. p. viii.

                                                                                            77
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

unanimity that functional security interests system stands on four
building blocks of "creation (attachment), registration, priorities and
enforcement."4 In this unit, we start with creation of a security interest.

1.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to how security interest under
the personal property legislation (the STMA 2017) is created as against
the creation (attachment) of security interest under common law
discussed in Module 3.

1.3 Formal versus Functional security interests

There are noticeable differences between the traditional (common law)
security systems discussed in Modules 3 and 4 and the functional
security system being considered in this Module. Can you take time to
think of such differences?

    1) It has been pointed out that the functional approach to security
         interests tend to "blur the traditional distinctions between the
         relative property rights attaching to different types of security
         interests."5 All rights stand on the same pedestal under the
         functional approach. The distinctions between legal and
         equitable rights that impinge on priority status of a creditor in the
         presence of other encumbrancing creditors under the formal
         security interests are absent in the functional approach.
         Ozekhome (2017) points out that the STMA 2017 "abolished the
         complex distinctin between legal and equitable interest in a
         movable property, especially as championed by the floating and
         fixed charges under the Companies and Allied Matters Act
         1990."6 Is this statement correct? It is not totally correct. This is
         because the distinction still exists especially in the context of
         charges created by companies. For instance, the STMA 2017 at
         section 2(3) states that the Act does not "prevent the creation of
         security of security interest in the form of charges by companies
         registered under the Companies and Allied Matters Act." On its
         part, the Central Bank of Nigeria (Registration of Security
         Interests in Movable Property by Banks and Other Financial
         Institions in Nigeira) (Regulations, No. 1, 2015) affirmed this
         position when it provides in Regulation 3(3) that the Regulations
         shall not apply to (b) charges required to be registered under the

4 Dubovec and Kambili (2015), ibid, p. 51 and Ozekhome (2017), ibid, p. ix.
5 Bridge, M.G., et al. (1999). Formalism, Functionalism, and Understanding the Law of Secured
Transactions. 44 McGill L.J. 567, pp. 575-576.
6 Ozekhome, ibid, p. ix

78
CLL805  MODULE 5

         Companeis and Allied Matters Act." Meaning that companies
         still create charges and in doing so still create security interest by
         way of floating charges over the debtors undertaking and
         business and fixed charges in respect of the debtors immovable
         properties. It means that the STMA 2017 shall continue to
         operate side by side other legislations on security interests.
    2) Under the form-based, security interest is created once
         attachment has occurred. Even if not perfected at this point, it
         can be enforced against the debtor. In other perfection is not a
         precondition for enforcing security interest under the common
         law or traditional security interest.7
    3) Under the formal security interests the parties are the debtor and
         creditor. However, under the functional approach, the STMA
         2017 at section 2(2) identifies three parties and proceeded in
         section 63(1) to describe the parties, to wit: the Borrower, the
         Grantor and the Creditor. While the borrower and Grantor of
         security interest. While the borrower is "the person to whom
         credit is extended with a financial obligation to repay under a
         Security Agreement;" the Grantor is the "person that has right in
         the collateral, and includes a grantor of any type of security
         interest in the form of a charge, chattel mortgage, pledge or lien
         in movable property." This means that someone one may take
         benefit of the credit (loan) while another person could bear the
         burden of the providing security for repayment of the loan.8 An
         example here is the parent company guarantee supported by
         security interest in the parent's movable assets. If this is the
         position under STMA 2017, it would be a significant departure
         from the posture of UCC Art 9, where it has been pointed that
         "guaranties embodied in the promises of third parties, which are
         personal rights rather than real rights, are not, as such, directly
         viewed as collateral under Article 9, are distinct from security
         interests and are governed by a separate, largely non-statutory,
         body of law..."9 The UCC Art 9 position on guarantees
         squwares up with its treatment under the formal approach which
         reqires third party guarantor to enter into a separate guarantee
         agreement with the creditor.
    4) Unlike the formal or traditional security interest devices that
         include land or immovable property, the security interest under
         the functional classification does not include land. However,
         immovable equipment is included.
    5) Enforcement of security interest under formal interest depends
         on the type of security interest created. As you have seen in

7 See Module 3, Para 2.4 How Form-based Security Interests Arise.
8 Ozekhome (2015), p. 70, agreeing with this position.
9 Sigman, H.C. (2004). Security in Movables in the United States ­ Uniform Commercial Code Article
9 ­ A Basis for Comparaison: in Kieninger, E.M. (Ed). (2004) Security Rights in Movable Property in
European Private Law. p. 57. CUP, United Kingdom

                                                                                            79
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

         Module 4, the enforcement powers available to the lienee,
         pledgee or mortgagee are different. However, this is not the case
         for the functional approach. This seems to be the attraction of the
         unitary system of security interest under the functional approach.

1.4 Creation of Functional Security Interest

With a security interest created, the other elements of perfection,
priority and enforcement remain dormant and inapplicable. What are
the conditions that must be present before security interest can be
effectively created under the functional security interest typology? Let
us consider some of the conditions. The conditions for attachment of
security under the formal or traditional security interest discussed under
Module 3 Unit 2.4 can be efficiently extrapolated to the conditions for
creation of functional security interest. Please read the said Unit again.

1.4.1 Agreement Between the Parties

It is created between a Grantor and Creditor by way of a Security
Agreement, section 3(1) STMA 2017. The creation includes after-
acquired property, which is "any asset acquired by a Grantor after the
coming into force of the Security Agreement shall take effect without
further consent or any other act of the Grantor at the moment the
Grantor acquires such asset." There are conditions to be met before an
after-acquired movable personal property can be caught within the ambit
of the Security Agreement giving life to the security interest. These are:

    1) the asset must correspond with description of the collateral in the
        Security Agreement. Collateral is a term of UCC Art 9 and means
        any movable property, whether tangible or intangible, that is
        subject to a security interest.10 Under the form-based security
        interests systems it is better known as security which could mean
        the interest acquired in the asset of the debtor (obligor or grantor)
        or the instrument creating that interest granted to the creditor
        (obligee) or the asssset itself which is the subject matter of the
        security interest.11 This last variant of the definition of security
        melds well with the definition of collateral.

    2) The Security Agreement must speicifally provide that the interest
        created includes the Grantor's present and future movable assets.
        This is like floating charge12 under the formal or traditional
        security interests. Assuming Bank A offers loan to the Borrower
        that used is present and future assets to secure the repayment of

10 Section 63(1) STMA 2017
11 Onamson (2017), p. 105
12 To be discussed in second semester of the course. This is because security interests created by
way of floating charge is normally by corporate entities. The STMA 2017 excluded floating charge
from its operation, see section 2(3) STMA 2017.

80
CLL805  MODULE 5

        the loan. Later the Borrower requires additional equipment to
        expand its businesss and approaches Bank B for a loan. Bank B
        says, yes we will give you the loan but only on the condition that
        you will use the same equipment to secure the repayment of the
        loan. The question for you is, if the Borrower collects the loan
        from Bank B and buys the equipment, which, between Bank A
        and Bank will rank in priority if the Borrower goes into financial
        troubles? Is the Bank A with after-acuired property clause in a
        pre-existing security agreement or Bank B with purchase money
        security interest (PMSI)13 in respect of that equyipemt? The after-
        acquired property clause in a security agreement will not displace
        any PMSI, wherein the interest of an encumbrancing creditor
        wtill step in priority to the creditor with after-acquired property
        security interest in the same property. Put in another way, even
        though Bank B is an encumbrancing creditor in respect of the
        Borrower's asssets, the subject of the security agreement, it will
        rank in priority over Bank A.14

1.4.2 Interest of the debtor in the asset

The security interest created must be to the extent of the interest of the
Grantor or debtor in the property constituting the collateral. By this, the
Act seems to draw a line between general property as against special
property in the collateral. In other words, where the extent of rights of
the grantor is limited to special property in the collateral he cannot
purport to create an interest beyond that interest. This brings us to a
critical point: ownership and possession. Do you think there is any
difference between ownership and possession in law? If yes, can you
attempt an explanation of the differences?

Indeed there is a difference between the two. Citing Honore, Bridge, et
al, defines ownership as the `greatest possible interest in a thing which a
mature system of law recognizes' (original emphasis), consisting of a
bundle of rights and incidents in respect of the thing... (it) may be
abbreviated as the perpetual right to possess and enjoy the thing; the
perpetual right to the fruits and profits generated by it; and the right to
alienate, bequeath, or destroy it."15 On the other hand, possession comes
when any of the rights of ownership is "surrendered in part without
surrendering ownership of the thing itself."16 In that case, the person to
whom the right is surrendered is said to be in possession, having a right
to possession of the thing itself but to ownership of it.

13 Section 63(1) defines PMSI as (a) a right in collateral taken or retained by the seller to secure all or
part of its purchase price; (b) a right taken by a person who provides credit to enable the grantor to
acquire the collateral if such credit is in fact so used; and (c) a right of a financial lessor.
14 Section 27 STMA 2017
15 Bridge, et al (2015), p. 45
16 Ibid

                                                                                            81
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

From this point the idea of general and special property17 emerges. In a
contract of sale of goods, the seller can only transfer the general
property (coinciding with ownership) in the goods for a money
consideration called the price. Thus, special property is limited in scope
will include the possessory right of pledgee or lienee.18 Thus,
"possession is a sufficient right for the purpose of secured financing
under the Act,"19 but the creditor in possession must take further steps to
perfect the interest.20

Now section 4(1) providing that the security interest created shall be to
the extent of the righs that the debtor has in the collateral and section
4(3) providing that a creation of a security interest in any movable asset
is effective, notwithstanding any agreement limiting the grantor's right
to create such security interest are troubling. One, Ozekhome observes
that section 4(1) in a misleading way takes us back to the "old sense of
characterising interests in property as either equitable or legal, such that
if a debtor has less than a legal right in a collateral, he can only grant
that equitable right and nothing more." However, whether the abolished
and therefore does not recognise the concepts of legal and equitable
rights is open, with respect, to argument.21 Two, if s 4(1) is taken at its
face value, what is effect of s 4(3)? It means that the debtor in
possession can grant security interest beyond the extent of his rights in
the collateral, despite the limitation to his right to do so.

1.4.3 Formal Contents of the Security Agreement

Even though the unitary conept of security interests is functionally-
based, it does commend itself to certain formalities. Consequently, the
security agreement created and embodying the security interest must
contain certain statutorily-prescribed contents.22 Thus it must

    a) reflect the intention of the grantor and creditor to create a
        security interest;

    b) identify the grantor and creditor:
    c) describe the secured obligation including the maximum

        amount for which the security interest is enforceable;
    d) describe the collateral adequately:
    e) indicate the tenor of the obligation secured; and

17 See section 1 Sale of Gods Act 1893, which talks of "property in the goods" to mean general
property and not special property.
18 Section 8(1) STMA 2017 which recognises such possessory right constituting special property.
19 Ozekhome (2017), p. 73
20 Section 8(2) STMA 2017
21 For example, section 4 Malawian Personal Property Security Act 2013 provides that except as
otherwise provided by this Act or any other Act or rule of law or equity, a security agreement shall
be effective and create a security interest as between the parties according to its terms. Although
this is a foreign legislative instrument, its persuasiveness cannot be in doubt.
22 Section 5 STMA 2017

82
CLL805  MODULE 5

    f) confirm the agreement by parties to submit to arbitration.
        as first recourse in a situation that any civil dispute arises.

Ozekhome provides a detailed analysiss of the above provisions of the
Act.23 For instance with respect to subsection 5(a) requiring the securing
agreement to reflect the intention of the grantor and creditor to create a
security interest he observes that the subsection "rests on the freedom of
contract: There has to be a consensus ad idem to demonstrate the
willingness of the parties to enter into a security agreement. This section
mirrors the tenets of the common law contract... (Importantly of the
particular subsection) seeks to seeks to eliminate is the bullying that
comes naturally from secured lenders because of their stronger position
in contractual bargains."24 Importantly, the characteristic of the
functional security interest as based unitary concept and notice filing is
brought out here. Thus, it is the financing statement or notice filing that
is registered. You may wish to compare this with detailed filing required
under CAMA 2020 for company charges.25

1.4.4 Identification of the Collaterall

Section 6 STMA 2017 provides as follows:

  1) A description of a Collateral is adequate if it is described with:
          a) item, kind, type or category, year of manufacture or any
              other description that can identify the Collateral; or
          b) a statement that a Security Interest is taken in all the present
              and future assets of the grantor; and
          c) for the purpose of section 6 (1) (a) and (b), a description of
              the insurance cover on the collateral.

  2) A Security Interest shall extend to the identifiable or traceable
      proceeds of a Collateral, whether or not the Security Agreement
      contains a description of the proceeds.

Ozekhome (2017) in his foundational work on Personal Propersity
Security Law in Nigeria provided a detailed analysis of the foregoing
section. You will do well to read it up at pages.

The Malawi Personal Property Security Act 2013 (PPSA 2013) lays
down the importance of the description of the collateral as a ground for
enforcing a security. Thus a security agreement shall be enforceable and
a security interest created in respect of collateral only if a security
agreement contains an adequate description of the collateral that may be
generic or specific.26 This provision is absent in the STMA 2017.

23 Ozekhome (2017), pp.84-89.
24 Ozekhome (2017), pp. 84-85
25 See section 222 CAMA 2020
26 Section 6(1) Malawi Personal Property Security Act 2013

                                                                                            83
CLL805                      LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Although no mention was made of "consumer goods in the section"
Ozekhome noted that "a preliminary difficulty, which has not even been
settled yet in secured transactions literature, may arise from the meaning
of `consumer goods'," defined in the STMA 2017 as "goods that the
debtor uses or intends to use primarily for personal, family or household
purpose."27 How do you think the "preliminary difficulty" should be
solved? The STMA 2017 seemingly did not provide any solution.
However, in a bold attempt to dissolve the preliminary difficulty, the
PPSA 2013 provides that a description is inadequate for the purposes of
section 6 if it describes the collateral as consumer goods without specific
reference to the item or kind of collateral.28 Meanwhile the Act defines
consumer goods to mean goods that are used or acquired for use
primarily for personal, domestic or household purpose. It is submitted
that the best way to dissolve the difficulty is to ask what is the primary
use for the goods? Or what is the primary intention as far as the use of
the goods is concerned?

As can be seen in subsection 2, security interests "extend to the
identifiable or traceable proceeds of a Collateral, whether or not the
Security Agreement contains a description of the proceeds." It has been
explained that the subsection is meant to prevent unconscionable debtors
from easily exchanging "encumbered collateral with another asset that
is not described in the security agreement, thereby depriving the secured
creditor of his security interest."29

                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 15
            a) What is ownership?
            b) Differentiate between "general property" and "special

                property."
            c) The definition of "consumer goods" under the Malawi

                PPSA 2013 is substantially the same with definition
                of the term under STMA 2017. State the definition
                according to PPSA 2013.
            d) What are the constituents of purchase money security
                interest as distilled in STMA 2017?
            e) What is the full meaning of the abbreviation UCC?

27 Section 63(1) STMA 2017
28 Section 7 PPSA 2013
29 Ozekhome (2017), p. 102

84
CLL805  MODULE 5

1.5 Summary

To create a security interest under the functional security interests
classification, certain conditions must be met. They include the presence
of agreement between the parties, the debtor or grantor must have
interest in the asset proposed to be furnished as security, the security
agreement must contain certain statutorily prescribed particualrs and the
collateral offered as security must be clearly described.

1.6 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

        1) Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020.
        2) Bridge, M. (2015). Personal Property Law, Fourth Edition. OUP,

             United Kingdom;
        3) Dubovec, M. and Kambili, C. (2015). A guide to the Personal

             Property Act: The Casse of Malawi. PULP, South Africa
        4) Kieninger, E.M. (Ed). (2004) Security Rights in Movable Property

             in European Private Law. CUP, United Kingdom
        5) Onamson, F.O. (2017). Law and Creditor Protection in Nigeria.

             Malthouse Law Books, Lagos.
        6) Ozekhome, M.A.A. (2017). Personal Property Law in Nigeria.

             PULP, South Africa

1.7 Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 15

         a) Ownership is the`greatest possible interest in a thing
             which a mature system of law recognizes consisting of a
             bundle of rights and incidents in respect of the thing.

         b) General property is the debtor's bundle of rights
             ownership) over the goods. On the other hand, special
             property is limited in scope will include the possessory
             right of pledgee or lienee.

         c) PPSA 2013 defines consumer goods to mean goods that
             are used or acquired for use primarily for personal,
             domestic or household purpose.

         d) The constituents of PMSI according to section 63(1)
             STMA 2017 are as follows: a) it is a right in collateral taken
              or retained by the seller to secure all or part of its purchase
              price; (b) it is a right taken by a person who provides credit to
              enable the grantor to acquire the collateral if such credit is in
              fact so used; and (c) it is a right of a financial lessor.

         e) The full meaning is Uniform Commercial Code.

        85
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

UNIT 2 PERFECTION

Unit Structure

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
3.3 Meaning of Perfection
3.4 Requirements of Perfection
3.5 Forms or Modes of Perfection

        2.4.1 The
        2.4.2 The
        2.4.3 Effects of the Sale
        2.4.4 Grounds for Impeaching the Sale
3.6 Summary
3.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
3.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction

In the last Unit, you studied creation of security interest. In this Unit,
you will go to the next step of the building blocks of security interest
under the functional security interest (otherwise known unitary security
interest based on notice filing). Upon creation of the security interest,
the secured party is expected to take further steps to establish its interest
in the collateral as one having proprietary in the collateral. Except this is
done, the secured party remains unsecured and in the case of insolvency
of the debtor (or grantor) the secured party will find itself among the
pool of unsecured creditors whose fate of recovery usually depends on
what might be left of the insolvent debtor's assets after satisfying
secured creditors and other preferred payments having been made.30
Ozekhome points out that perfection "by way of registration of security
interests in the collateral registery" under the unitary security system
addresses the shortcomings of the traditional security interests system.
The challenges were in the form of "risks and hardship emanating from
possessory security interests."31

3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to
    a) understand the meaning of perfection under functional security
        interests classification

30 See section 657 Companies and Allied Matters Act 2020
31 Ozekhome (2017) p. 110

86
CLL805  MODULE 5

b) know the requirements of perfection
c) to explain perfection of security interest under the personal

    property legislation (the STMA 2017).

3.3 Meaning of Perfection

On perfection Sigman (2004)32 writes that "the concept of ``perfection"
is used by Article 933 as an element of the priority scheme." However,
he cautions that a"the term is somewhat misleading in that it suggests an
absolute that is not the case." Explaining further, he said "a perfected
security interest generally but not always prevails over a competing
interest, and an unperfected security interest does not always lose.
Rather, it is necessary to examine the specific priority rule applicable to
a particular contest to ascertain whether perfection determines which
party will prevail. Perfection is irrelevant vis-à-vis the debtor." For
instance, the purchase money security interest enjoys priority over non-
purchase money security in the same collateral.34 Except there is
attachment, there can be no perfection. In other words, "perfection is
predicated upon the creation of a security interest.35 What, then, are the
requirements of perfection?

3.4 Requirements of Perfection

Section 8 STMA 2017 provides:

    1) A Security Interest is perfected when a Financing Statement in
        respect of that Security Interest has been registered in the
        Collateral Registry established under this Act.

    2) For the purposes of this Act, a Secured Creditor may take
        possession of the Collateral but mere possession does not perfect
        the security interest.

From the above provision, perfection occurs when a Financing
Statement in respect of a Security Interest has been registered in the
Collateral Registry. Although possession is an element of perfection,
possession without more does not equate perfection. That is, possession
must be coupled with a duly registered financing statement.

Comparatively, the PPSA 2013 provides that perfection occurs when (a)
the security interest has been created; and (b) either - (i) a financing

32 Sigman, H.C. (2004). Security in Movables in the United States ­ Uniform Commercial Code Article
9 ­ A Basis for Comparaison: in Kieninger, E.M. (Ed). (2004) Security Rights in Movable Property in
European Private Law. p. 118. CUP, United Kingdom
33 See sections 9-308--9-316 UCC
34 See section 27 STMA 2017.
35 Dubovec and Kambili (2015), p. 66.

                                                                                            87
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

statement has been registered in respect of the security interest; (ii) the
secured party, or another person on the secured party's behalf, has
possession of the collateral (except where possession is a result of
seizure or repossession); or (iii) the secured party, or another person on
the secured party's behalf has control of the collateral that is a deposit
account or investment security.

In simple terms the PPSA 2013 ordains that perfection occurs in two
cases. First, the security interest has been created (i.e., attachment)
evidenced by a financing statement which must be registered in
respectof the security interest and the secured party or his agent is in
possession of the colateral. Second, a created security interest evidenced
by a duly registered financing statement and the secured party has
control of the collateral that is a deposit account or investment security.
As between the STMA 2017 and the PPSA 2013 the latter is preferred
for being detailed and more straightforward.

What, then, are the requirements that you can glean from the STMA
2017 provisions? The first critical requirement is filing of a financing
statement. This implies that the security interest must have attached ­
that is creation must have taken place. The second is possession which
must be coupled with a duly registered financing statement on the backs
of a duly created security interest. Having met the requirement, the
perfected security interest occurs either by control, registration,
possession coupled with control or proceeds in the collateral. At this
point, you must have noticed that there is a difference between
"financing statement" and "security agreement." Can you hazard a guess
on the difference between the two?

2.4.1 Defining the Terms: Financing Statement, Security Agreement

and Security Interest

Section 63(1) STMA 2017, Financing Statement means the prescribed
forms on which infonnation is provided to effect a registration under this
Act or any regulation made hereunder. Section 2(1) PPSA 2013 defines
financing statement to forms in writing or their electronic equivalent as
provided in the Registry Regulations on which information is provided
in order to effect, amend, terminate or continue a registration.

With respect to security agreement36 section 63(1) STMA 2017 defines
it as an agreement in any form and howsoever entitled entered into
between the grantor and the creditor that creates a security interest under
this Act. Against this is the definition in PPSA 2013 that a security
agreement is an agreement between the debtor and secured party that
creates or provides for a security interest.

36 See Paragraph 1.4.3 above on the formal contents of a security agreement.

88
CLL805  MODULE 5

Moreover, STMA 2017 defined Security Interest as a property right in
collateral that is created by agreement and secures payment or other
performance ofan obligation, regardless of whether the parties have
denominated it as a security interest but it does not include a personal
right against a guarantor or other person liable for the performance of
the secured obligation. On the other hand, PPSA 2013 defined the same
term as a property right in personal property that is created by agreement
and secures payment or other performance of an obligation, regardless
of whether the parties have denominated it as a security interest, but
does not include a personal right against a guarantor or other person
liable for the payment of the secured obligation.

We have intentionally brought out the definitions of the key terms from
the Nigerian legislation and Malawian legislation to show the similarity
amongst personal property security legislations across differing
jurisidictions with differing legal origins. This underscored the point that
most personal property security legislations rode on the back and
throough the lens of UCC Art 9, technically called legal transplant.

That said, the order of presenting the terms reflect the order of their
creation. Implying that financing statement occurs first, followed by the
security agreement. Both the financing statement and the security
agreement are on the same journey towards the same destination: to give
to life a security interest as intended by the debtor (grantor) and the
creditor (secured party). Without these steps business efficacy with
respect to the creation of security interest cannot be achieved. You may
wish to ask, since the financing statement is not sufficient to create
security interest why should I file a financing statement and not the
security agreement to close out the transaction once and for all? This
takes us to the role or functions of a financing statement. As you will
see, this is the beauty of the unitary system as one based on notice filing.

2.4.3 Functions of a Financing Statement

The financing statement is a statutorily prescribed and electronically
filed form in the collateral registry that usually contains as much as
possible minimal information that "identifies the debtor and the secured
party and provides an "indication" of the collateral, which may be
specific or in very general terms or even in supergeneric language."37
The financing statement is the touchstone of the notice filing system
under the unitary security interest concept.

On the nature of the financing statement, Ozekhome (2017) states that:

37 Sigman (2004), p. 76

                                                                                            89
CLL805                      LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

     A filed financing statement typically describes the borrower's assets
     in super-generic form and does not contain a specific description of
     the various assets under encumbrance as obtainable in a document
     filing system. If the secured party wishes to know which specific
     assets are under encumbrance, he would have to request the security
     agreement from the borrower to ascertain the scope of asset
     encumbrance. As a shorthand formula, if the description in the
     security agreement is narrower in scope than that covered in the
     financing statement, then the description captured in the security
     agreement would be used to determine the extent of encumbrance.
     However, if the description in the financing statement is narrower than
     that captured in the security agreement, a third party's effectiveness
     would be determined by the financing statement.

We present a few functions of a financing statement, and encourage you
to read more on this.

1) Unlike the transactios filing sytem under the traditional security
    interest system, the financing statement which represents the notice
    filing system is error free because it is implemented on a
    computerised or automated framework.

2) Since "a financing statement may be filed before attachment of the
    security interest, indeed, even before a security agreement made,"
    the financing statement is prospective and prophylactic. While it can
    be filed to evidence a completed secured interest transaction or
    arrangement between the parties, it can be generated to evidence a
    prospective or executory secured interest transaction. In this sense, it
    is prophylactic because it preventively signals and puts on enquiry
    would-be encumbrancing subsequent creditors that the asset
    proposed for to secure the financial accommodation may not be free
    from encumbrances.

3) There is minimal opportunity for fraud. This is because A filed
    financing statement, however, is not effective unless the filing is
    authorized by the debtor (grantor) in writing,38 although a duly made
    out security agreement is sufficient to constitute consent by the
    grantor for the registration of initial or amendment financing
    statement.39 What is the implication of this provision in relation to a
    security agreement? It implies that (a) the security agreement is
    source document for the information contained in the financing
    statement; and (b) the financing statement can still be filed before
    attachment or the security agreement is concluded.

38 Section 13(1) STMA 2017
39 Section 13(2) STMA 2017

90
CLL805  MODULE 5

2.4.4 Errors in a Financing Statement

The law recognises that there are instances where material errors40 that if
present could render a financing statement defective and inoperative. A
financing statement is inoperative if there are errors the following:

    1. The unique identification number of the grantor
    2. The serial numner of the collateral that causes the registration not

        to be retrieved in a search

In respect of Error 1 the effect is that it will render the reegistration
ineffective only with respect to the grantor. In the case of Error 2, the
effect is that it will render the registered financing statement ineffective
only with resepct to the collateral identified by such serial number.

3.5 Modes of Perfection

We shall briefly consider three modes of perfecting a security interest.
Meanwhile, bear in mind that the points discussed on the requirements
of perfection are relevant for this discussion.

3.5.1 Control

According to Dubovec and Kambili (2015):

       Under the PPSA, perfection by control will be available both to
       banks but also third parties such as sellers of equipment and
       inventory or financial institutions that under the Malawian laws
       are not authorised to take deposits. Canadian experts
       summarised the essence of control as follows: Perfection by
       control occurs when the creditor has taken whatever steps are
       necessary to be in a position to sell the collateral without any
       further action by the debtor.

While the above submission is point with respect to the Malawian and
Canadian jurisdictions where the unitary system operates maximally, it
is doubtful if the same scenario may obtain in Nigeria. Why do you
think this is the case? This is because in Nigeria the collateral registry,
for now, is domiciled in and managed by the Central Bank and the users
of the registry is limited to financial institutions. This defeats oe of the
cardinal objectives41 of the STMA, which is facilitate access to credit
secured with movable assets and in so doing "stimulate responsible
lending to small, micro and medium enterprises," the prime drivers of
economic development.

40 Section 16 STMA 2017
41 See section 1(b) and 1(c) STMA 2017.\

                                                                                            91
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Secondly, control under the Nigerian jurisdiction is restrictively
construed and does not include "third parties sellers of equipment and
inventory." Ozekhome (2017) confirms that it "is restricted to bankers
only" with reference to `deposit account.'42 However, the UCC Article 9
is said to allow "the perfection of a security interest by control with
respect to a wider list of assets, including electronic documents of title
and electronic chattel paper."43

It is not surprising to see Ozekhome (2017) submitting that:

       a fair reading of section 29 ST Act shows that only bankers can use
       `control' as a perfection method. Secured creditors dealing on
       investment property such as shares and other intangible property
       cannot take advantage of control as a perfection method. They must
       register their security interests in the CBN collateral registry as
       well as another specialised registry in order to perfect their security
       interests in the investment property. It is advised that the law
       makers should amend the ST Act to enable brokerage account
       managers to deem their security interests in the debtor's investment
       property, perfected by virtue of control.

To conclude on this point, you should know that perfection by control
cannot apply to all types of assets. Consequently, it is not possible to
gain control over tangible property such as inventory as a means of
perfection and perfected by control over some intangible assets such as
shares, accounts receivable, etc may not be feasible. Apart from this
there is need for legislative reform in this and other areas of the law.

3.5.2 Possession
On possession section 8 STMA 2017 provides as follows:

    1) A security interest is perfected when a financing statement in
        respect of that security interest has been registered in the
        Collateral Registry established under this Act.

    2) For the purposes of this Act, a secured creditor may take
        possession of the collateral but mere possession does not
        perfect the security interest.

Giving more insight on possession, Sigman (2004) writes that:
   Possession, of course, can be used as a method of perfection only
   with respect to tangible collateral. Possession has its traditional
   meaning, with the secured party able to hold possession itself or
   through its agent (or through a bailee who has attorned to the

42 Ozekhome (2017), p. 120
43 Dubovec and Kambili (2015), p. 75

92
CLL805  MODULE 5

   secured party), but the debtor, of course, cannot serve as the
   secured party's agent for this purpose. This perfection method
   means actual, not constructive or other fictitious, possession.44

Dubovec and Kambili (2015) restates that possession is an alternative to
registration, it has relatively minimal commercial relevance for the
perfection of security interests. On his part, Ozekhome (2017) writes
that under section 8(2) of the ST Act, possession as a method of
perfection of security interest in collateral is not recognised.

Thus, a secured creditor may take possession of collateral, but such
possession would not earn him third party effectiveness. Third party
effectiveness supposes a situation where an encumbrancing creditor can
secure priority over the creditor in posession, or purchaser for value
without notice can good title.45 Ozekhome (2017) gave justifications
why possession should not constitute effective perfection:

     if possession is left to be a valid method of possession, then no one
     may concretely believe the contents of a registry which indicates that
     no secured creditor or a particular number of secured creditors exist
     in respect of a collateral, because it could be possible that a secured
     creditor had already been given possession of that collateral, whose
     hierarchy would supersede because of the second reason. The second
     reason is that it is not easy to prove when possession was conferred
     as to effectively determine the particular time perfection exactly
     occurred, unlike in registration whereby the date and time constitute
     an objective way of determining time of perfection.46

Do you agree with the position of the learned author? As intelligent
as the reasons may appear, they are not entirely tenable. One, the
position of the learned author purports constructive possession,
which should not be the case. There are jurisdictions where
possession is a complete form of perfection. In all such jurisdictions
where possession is permitted or provided as a means of perfecting
security interest the requirement is, understandably, actual physical
possession other than possession by seizure or repossession or even
constructive possession. Examples of jurisdictions where
possession confers complete perfection include United States,
Canada,47 New Zealand,48 and Australia.49

44 Sigman, p. 71
45 The presence of notice will vitiate the good faith of the third party. As such he cannot take good
title, because he who has notice has no equity:
46Ozekhome (2017), p. 133
47 Section 24(1) Personal Property security Act, Revised Statutes of Alberta, Chapter P-7
48 Section 41 New Zealand Personal Property Securities Act 1999
49 Section 21(2) Australia Personal Property Securities Act 2009. Generally on possession, see s 24.

                                                                                            93
CLL805                   LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

Thus, actual possession dispossesses the debtor of the asset. No
diligent and prudent creditor will extend financial accommodation
on the backs of a non-existent asset or an asset not shown to be in
existence at the time of the transaction, except where the asset is to
be acquired in future. Where the asset is to be acquired in the
future, a prudent creditor would insist on purchase money security
interest. Two, assuming other things are held constant and the
reasons adjudged tenable, the problem becomes a localised one
limited to Nigeria only. The problem in this instance, it is
submitted, is one for failure of our legal system to provide against
the consequences of information asymmetry (adverse selection) and
hidden action (moral hazard), which are the stock in trade of an
ethically challenged debtor or the unconscionable creditor that
would have no scruples colluding with "a dishonest borrower" to
transfer possession to the unconscionable creditor "with a
backdated security agreement, thereby hiding the actual time of
transfer of possession."50

Possession of intangible property confers complete perfection. What is
an intangible property? What examples can you proffer? For an
understanding of intangible property and examples of assets that
constitute intangibles, you should go to Unit 4, Module 2 of the Course
and read again about assets smenable to creation of security interest. In
this connection, Section 31 STMA 2017 clearly shows us the ways the
holder of documentary intangible, in this case negotiable instrument or
bill of lading, can have priority over a perfected security interest in the
same asset. Can you identify the ways? It occurs where the holder- (a)
gave value; or (b) acquired the negotiable instrument or the title
document without knowledge that the transaction is in breach of the
security agreement towhich the security interest relates; and (c) took
possession of the negotiable instrument o the title document.

3.5.3 Automatic Perfection

Section 9 STMA 2017 provides:

    1) A security interest in any proceeds of the collateral is perfected
        automatically without any further action by the grantor or the
        creditor when the proceeds arise or are acquired if:
          a) The proceeds are described in the Financing Statement; or
          b) The proceeds are in the form of money, accounts
              receivables, negotiable instruments or bank accounts.

    2) If the proceeds are not of the kind covered in the preceding sub
        section, the security interest will remain perfected if the Creditor

50 Ozekhome (2017) ibid

94
CLL805  MODULE 5

        registers an amendment adding a description of the asset that is
        proceeds within 15 days after they arose.

In this case the secured party need not take any further steps as to
registration if the above conditions are fulfilled. What are the conditions
to be met before automatic perfection can arise under the STMA 2017?
One condition is if the proceeds are described in the financing statement.
Two, if the proceeds are in the form of money or accounts receivable, or
bank accounts. Three, if the proceeds are not described in the financing
statement and they are not in the form of money or accounts receivable,
etc, but the creditor amends the financing statement and therein
described the proceeds. This must be done within 15 days after the
proceeds in the collateral arose. PPSA 2013 appears to have more robust
provisions relating to perfection that extends to bailees, crops, etc.51

                        SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 16
        1) In jurisdictions where perfection by possession confers

            complete security interest, what is the nature of such
            possession?

        2) What are the various ways automatic perfection can occur?

        3) Carefully bring out the requirements of perfection under the
            Nigerian STMA 2017?

3.6 Summary

In this Unit, you are able to understand the meaning of perfection and
the different ways by which perfection can be achieved. They include
control, possession, registration and automatic perfection. The meaning
of such technical terms as financing statement and security agreement
were brought out and the functions of financing statement explained.

3.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Beale, et al (2012). Law of Security and Title-based Financing.
Onamson F.O. (2017). Law of Creditor Protection in Nigeria.

51 For example, see sections 16, 17, 18 and 19 PPSA 2013.

                                                                                            95
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 16

    1) In such jurisidictions the nature or the requirement is actual
        physical possession other than possession by seizure or
        repossession or even constructive possession.

    2) Automatic perfection can occur in three ways. One condition is
        if the proceeds are described in the financing statement. Two, if
        the proceeds are in the form of money or accounts receivable, or
        bank accounts. Three, if the proceeds are not described in the
        financing statement and they are not in the form of money or
        accounts receivable, etc, but the creditor amends the financing
        statement and therein described the proceeds. out of its estate.

    3) The requirements are (a) perfection occurs when a Financing
        Statement has been registered in the Collateral Registry; and (b)
        although an element of perfection, possession must be coupled
        with a duly registered financing statement.

96
CLL805  MODULE 5

UNIT 3 REGISTRATION, PRIORITY AND
ENFORCEMENT

Unit Structure

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes
3.3 Registration
3.4 The Priority Rule under the functional security interest
3.5 Enforcement
3.6 Summary
3.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
3.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises

3.1 Introduction
Recall that in our discussion on priorities under form-based security
interest, you were told that priority is usually reckoned from the point of
creation as against the time of registration.52 This position, remember, is
distinguished from other cases where the law ordains that registration is
determined from the time of registration of security interest.53 In this
unit, you will see the position from a slightly different but related
against as we examine registration, priorities and enforcement of
functional security interests created under STMA 2017.

3.2 Intended Learning Outcomes

By the end of the Unit, you will be able to:
 Understand the concept of registration under the functional

        security interest.
 Distinguish between the different forms or categories of priorities

        under the functional security interest
 Apply the law in enforcing functional security interests

3.3 Registration
Ozekhome (2017) put the matter in perspective as followsss:

 Registration, from the perspective of the ST Act, is an important method
 that lawyers should bear in mind. Thus, there should be no restriction in
 emphasising the radical distinction between document filing, which is
 what Nigerian lawyers are familiar with, and the new notice filing system
 under the ST Act, which is the registration of a financing statement that
 embodies some specific information. Unlike the requirement in section

52 Section 222 CAMA 2020
53 Section 56(1) Merchant Shipping Act 2007

                                                                                            97
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

 19754 of CAMA to file a copy of a security agreement, thereby impeding
 the efficiency of the CAC registry due to the overwhelming volume of
 paperwork which the registry staff are made to navigate on a daily basis
 in their search, as well as the acceptance of security agreements for
 filing,55 notice filing system under the STMA 2017 is a simple (and
 usually one page) form providing a minimum amount of information
 that identifies the debtor and the secured party and provides an
 "indication of the collateral to which it relates. (Words in bold are
 mine). At this point, the question is of what use is registration?

CAMA 2020 pointed us to the necessity of registration when it stated
that a registrable but unregistered interest will be void against the
creditor and liquidator. In other words, registration makes it possible to
achieve third party effectiveness in relation to the relevant collateral.
However, in the absence of a validly created security agreement between
the borrower and the secured creditor, a filed or registered financing
statement will not be effective against third parties as to entitle the
secured creditor to a secured position. Thus, if a third party acquires the
borrower's collateral56 purported to have been encumbered by a
registered financing statement not backed with a validly-created security
agreement, the encumbrancing third party will acquire good tite in the
asset, supposedly subject to security interest.

Thus, the effect of third party effectiveness rest squarely on the principle
that creation and registration must be present at any one time before a
third party effectiveness can be achieved. On this basis, a validly-created
security agreement is not enough to trump a third party's right, neither is
a stand-alone registration without a validly-created security agreement
enough to achieve that. Third party effectives means that the creditor has
taken steps to protect its proprietary (or security) interests or right in the
collateral by ensuring that it is duly registered in the CBN collateral
registry, except in instances where the collateral is represented by a
negotiable instrument or document of title and the holder fulfilled the
requirements of the law.57

To understand the difference between a financing statement and a
security agreement we have to advert our mind to the question of what
are the contentents of a security agreement. Ozekhome (2017) brought
out the contents.58 They are itemised below:

    (a) Consensus ad idem, section 5(a) STMA 2017. Parties must show
        their willingness and freedom to enter a security agreement.

54 Obviously this is reference to CAMA 2004 repealed by CAMA 2020. The provision is contained in
section 222 CAMA 2020
55 Ozekhome (201), p. 165
56 The third party can acquire the asset by sale, gift or court judgment.
57 Ozekhome (2017), p. 114
58 Ibid, p. 116

98
CLL805  MODULE 5

    (b) Identification of parties, section 5(b) STMA 2017. The agreement
        must identify the party with a right in the collateral as against the
        party advancing the credit or making the loan.

    (c) Description of the underling obligations, section 5(c) STMA
        2017. The agreement must draw up the terms and conditions
        guiding the relationship of the parties.

    (d) The collateral must be adequately described, section 5(d) STMA
        2017. Three reasons have been adduced for the requirement of
        description of the collateral, to wit: (i) it is a requirement of
        attachment; (ii) security interest extens to the identifiable or
        traceable proceeds of a collateral; and (iii) the collateral is the fall
        back in the event of default. That is the secured creditor would
        only be entitled to repossess the collateral and nothing more.
        How do you adequately describe the collateral? This is, and can
        be, done in two ways:
            (i) the collateral is adequately described if it is accompanied
                with item, kind, type or category, year of manufacturer or
                any other elements that can identify the collateral and
                insurance cover on the collateral.59
            (ii) It contains a statement that a security interest is taken in all
                the present and future assets of the grantor together with
                an insurance cover on the collateral.60

    (e) The tenor of the secured obligation must be disclosed, section
        5(c) STMA 2017. That is the security agreement is not meant to
        exist ad infinitum. It must contain a provision as to its lifespan,
        "to ensure that the security agreement is not valid in perpetuity
        against the debtor and its assets.

How do you go about registering a financing statement and a security
agreement? This is where the role and place of National Collateral
Registry (NCR) comes in. The NCR is the registry for security interests
created under and pursuant to the STMA 2017. It is domiciled in, and
overseen by, the Central Bank of Nigeria. A discussion of the NCR is
contained in the next Unit of this Module.

3.4 The Registry
        The Registry is the National Collateral Registry (otherwise
        called the Collateral Registry) domiciled in and controlled by the
        Central Bank of Nigeria.61 The head of the Registry is a Registrar
        appointed by the Governor of Centrral Bank of Nigeria. The

59 Section 6(1)(a) STMA 2017
60 Section 6(1)(b) STMA 2017. This envisages a "floating lien" equivalent to floating charge under the
traditional or form-based security interest.
61 Section 10 STMA 2017

                                                                                            99
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

        Registrar has supervisory and administrative oversight over the
        activities and operations of the Collateral Registry.

        Functionally62, the Collateral Registry is saddled with:
            (a) receiving, registring and storing information abobt security
                foterests in movable assets;
            (b) providing access to persons who may seek information on
                security interests from the Collateral Registry; and
            (c) pe1fohn such other functions a's may be prescribd,by
                regulations made under this Act.

3.5 The Priority rule under the functional security interest
       system (represented by the STMA 2017

Like the Merchant Shipping Act 2007 considered in Module 3 under
priorities of form-bassed security interest, the overarching priority rule63
of security interests under the functional system in a collateral is
determined by the order in which they are registered in the collateral.
Basically, the first to register rule applies to the effect that if two or
more security rights are perfected in a collateral, determining their
priority would not be based on the order in which they are created, but
the order in which they are registered. Registry.64

It is important to draw your attention that there are different
circumstances or situations in which priority rule operates under the
functional security system. One of such circumstances or cases iss the
priority of purchase money security interest and its proceeds.
Consequently, a purchase money security interest (PMSI) in a collateral
or its proceeds shall have priority over a non-purchase money security
interest in the same collateral created by the same Grantor if the
purchase money securit) interest in the collateral or its proceeds is
perfected when the Grantor obtained possession of the collateral.65 Other
instances or situations where the law made specific rule of priority that
may operate as an exception to the general rule include priority of
security interest in processed or commingled goods,66 priority relating to
receipt of funds and cash,67 priority of lien holders,68 and priority of
holders of negotiable instruments, title documents,69 and priority of
assignees,70 and priority of judgement creditor,71 etc.

62 Section 11 STMA 2017
63 Section 23 STMA 2017
64 Ozekhome (2017), p. 201
65 Section 27 STMA 2917
66 Section 28 STMA 2017
67 Section 29 STMA 2017
68 Section 30 STMA 2017
69 Section 31 STMA 2017
70 Section 33 STMA 2017
71 Section 34 STMA 2017

100
CLL805                   MODULE 5

3.6 Enforcement
Just like the creditor has enforcement rights against in the case of form-
based security interest, the creditor with a security interest pursuant to
the STMA 2017 enjoys certain enforcement powers, that may not be
available to creditor with secured interest under numerus clausus of
security interests. Let us briefly consider two of the enforcement rights
or powers available to the creditor in the event of debtor default:

3.6.1 Repossession of collateral
Once there is an event default with reference to the covenants in the
security agreement, and the secured creditor intends to enforce his
security right, the Act "requires that he gives the debtor notice of the
default and his intention to repossess the collateral. The notice may be
delivered by any method agreed by the parties."72

3.6.2 Sale of repossessed collateral
On repossession of the collateral the secured creditor has a right under
the Act to sell the repossessed collateral `as is.' This infers sale in its
present condition without any obligation to refurbishing it in view of
realising a higher sale price.73
.

                            SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 16
           1) Enumerate the statutory roles of the National Collateral

               Registry in Nigeria.

           2) Why do think registration of security interest is important?

           3) State and discuss at least two contents of a security

               agreement.

           4) What is the enabling law that created the Collateral

               Registry?

           5) Identify at least two of the enforcement rights available to a

               creditor whose debtor has defaulted.

72 Section 41 STMA 2017
73 Section 44 STMA 2017

                         101
CLL805  LAW OF SECURED CREDIT TRANSACTIONS I

3.7 Summary
In this Unit you have been exposed to registration, priority and
enforcement under the functional security interest as represented by the
Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017. While there is no
doubt that you have been well acquainted with the principles of the
subject, it is expected that you will take steps to lay your hands on the
law to gain further insights.

3.8 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Onamson F.O. (2017). Law of Creditor Protection in Nigeria.
Secured Transactions in Movable Assets Act 2017

3.9 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercises 16

        1) The statutory functions of the Collateral Registry are:
                (a) receiving, registring and storing information abobt
                    security foterests in movable assets;
                (b) providing access to persons who may seek information
                    on security interests from the Collateral Registry; and
                (c) pe1fohn such other functions a's may be prescribd,by
                    regulations made under this Act.

        2) It is to enable the secured party to achieve third party
            effectiveness.

        3) The two contents of a security agreement are:
                (a) Identification of parties, section 5(b) STMA 2017. The
                    agreement must identify the party with a right in the
                    collateral as against the party advancing the credit or
                    making the loan.
                (b) Description of the underling obligations, section 5(c)
                    STMA 2017. The agreement must draw up the terms and
                    conditions guiding the relationship of the parties

        4) The Collateral Registry, otherwise known as the National
            Collateral Registry is created pursuant to section 10 STMA
            2017

102
