COURSE
 GUIDE

CLL 817
LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION
LAW I

Course Team  Dr. Ernest O. Ugbejeh (Course Developer/
             Writer )-NOUN
             Prof. Justus Sokefun (Course Editor)-NOUN
             Dr. Ernest O. Ugbejeh
             Dr. Felix K. Olakulehin (Copy Editor)-NOUN

NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA
CLL 817                              COURSE GUIDE

Headquarters
Plot 91, Cadastral Zone,
University Village,
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway,
JABI - ABUJA
URL: www.nou. edu.ng

Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos

Published by
National Open University of Nigeria

Printed 2022
ISBN: 978-978-058-465-8

All Rights Reserved

ii
CLL 817                                                         COURSE GUIDE

CONTENTS                                            PAGE

Introduction............................................... iv

Course Learning Outcomes............................ iv

Working through this course........................... iv

Course Materials......................................... v

Study Units............................................... v

Textbooks and Reference............................. vii

Assessment.............................................. vii

Tutor Marked Assignment............................ vii

Final Examination and Grading.................... . vii

Course Score Distribution............................ viii

Course Overview/Presentation......................  viii

How to get the most from this course................ ix

Tutors and Tutorials................................... x

Summary................................................ x

                                                                iii
CLL 817  COURSE GUIDE

INTRODUCTION

Welcome to CLL 817: Law of Commercial and Consumer Protection I.
This course is one of the LL.M courses in National Open University of
Nigeria available to LL.M students. This course is offered in the first
semester of your study and it is a 3-credit unit course.

This first semester of Law of Commercial Transaction and Consumer
Protection I course dealt with the sale of goods law and the e-
commercial transactions. On the first arm of sale of goods: development
and sources of sale of goods law, the nature and definition of sale of
goods, subject matter of sale of goods and the distinction of Sale of
Goods from Other Commercial Transactions were covered. The general
principle and formation of contract as it relates to sale of goods,
elements of sale of goods, terms of contract, exclusion clause,
fundamental term, fundamental breach, passing of property by non-
owner, passing of property in specific and unascertained goods were all
examined. Duties and remedies of seller as well as that of the buyers
were dealt with in this course material. Also, treated in this course
material is the e-commercial transaction as it relates to sale of goods.

COURSE AIM

The aim of this course is to familiarize the learner with the subject
matter which is dealt with herein and which the student is expected to
know much about after reading through.

COURSE LEARNING OUTCOMES

In order to achieve the aims stated above, some general as well as
specific Learning Outcomes have been designed in this regard. The
specific Learning Outcomes are indicated at the beginning of each unit.

The general LEARNING OUTCOME will be achieved at the end of the
course material. At the completion of the course material you should be
able to:

1) Understand the development and sources of sale of goods law.
2) Understand the nature and definition of the Sale of Goods.
3) Distinguish sale of goods from other commercial transactions.
4) Know the essential elements of a contract of sale of Goods.
5) Understand the formalities for the formation of a contract of sale

        of goods
6) Understand terms of contract and terms implied by statute
7) Understand and relate together the concepts of fundamental term,

        fundamental breach and exclusion clause.

iv
CLL 817                                  COURSE GUIDE

8) Distinguish between ownership, possession and passing of
        property.

9) Understand the duties of the seller.
10) Understand the duties of the buyer.
11) Appreciate the remedies available to the seller and the buyer.
12) Know the effect of contract of sale of goods.
13) Discern the remedies available to the innocent party in case of

        breach.
14) Understand e-commercial contracts.
15) Know the formation of e-commercial contract.
16) Understand the various payment devices

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE

To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units,
recommended books, relevant cases and other materials provided by
NOUN. Each unit contains a Self-Assessment Exercise, and at points in
the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment
purposes. At the end of the course there is a final examination. The
course should take you about 13 weeks to complete. You will find all
the components of the course listed below. You need to make out time
for each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.

COURSE MATERIALS

The major components of the course are.

a) Course guide.
b) Study Units.
c) Textbooks
d) Assignment file/Seminar Paper
e) Presentation schedule.

MODULES AND STUDY UNITS

There are 23 study units divided into 6 modules as follows:

MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION

Unit 1   Development and Sources of Sale of Goods Law
Unit 2   Nature and Definition of Sale of Goods
Unit 3   Subject Matter of Sale of Goods
Unit 4   Sale of Goods Distinguished from Other Commercial
         Transactions
Unit 5   Essential Elements of a Contract of Sale of Goods

                                                             v
CLL 817                                        COURSE GUIDE

Unit 6   Formalities for the Formation of a Contract of Sale of
         Goods

MODULE 2 PASSING OF PROPERTY

Unit 1   Terms of Contract
Unit 2   Terms Implied by Statute
Unit 3   Exclusion Clauses, Fundamental Terms and Fundamental
         Breach

MODULE 3 PASSING OF PROPERTY

Unit 1   The Concept of Property.
Unit 2   Passing of property in Specific Goods.
Unit 3   Factors Negating Application of Rule 1 of Section 18
Unit 4   Passing of Property in Unascertained or Future Goods

MODULE 4 TRANSFER OF TITLE TO NON-OWNER

Unit 1   Transfer of title by non-Owner.
Unit 2   Exception to the doctrine of Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet

MODULE 5DUTIES OF AND REMEDIES FOR THE
               SELLERS AND THE BUYERS

Unit 1   Duties of the Seller.
Unit 2   Duties of the Buyer.
Unit 3   Remedies of the Seller.
Unit 4   Remedies of the Buyer.
Unit 5   Factors Affecting liability under contract of Sales of
         Goods

MODULE 6  E-COMMERCIAL CONTRACTS AND
          VARIOUS PAYMENT DEVICES

Unit 1   Definition of E-Commercial Contracts
Unit 2   Formation of E-Commercial Contract
Unit 3   Various Payment Devices

All these Units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and
values, which merit your attention and thought. Tackle them in separate
study periods. You may require several hours for each.

vi
CLL 817  COURSE GUIDE

We suggest that the Modules be studied one after the other, since they
are linked by a common theme. You will gain more from them if you
have first carried out work on the law of contract. You will then have a
clearer picture into which to paint these topics. Subsequent units are
written on the assumption that you have completed previous Units.

Each study unit consists of one week's work and includes specific
Learning Outcomes, directions for study, reading materials and Self-
Assessment Exercises (SAE). Together with Tutor Marked Assignments,
these exercises will assist you in achieving the stated Learning
Outcomes of the individual units and of the course.

REFERENCES ­ FURTHER READING

Certain books have been recommended in the course. You should read
them where so directed before attempting the exercise.

ASSESSMENT

There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor Marked
Assignments and a written examination. In doing these assignments you
are expected to apply knowledge acquired during the course. The
assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the
Assignment file. The work that you submit to your tutor for assessment
will count for 30% of your total score.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES

There is a self-assessment exercise at the end for every unit. You are
required to attempt all the assignments. You will be assessed on all of
them, but the best three performances will be used for assessment. The
assignments carry 10% each.

Extensions will not be granted after the due date unless under
exceptional circumstances.

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING

The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and
will carry 70% of the total course grade. The examination will consist of
questions, which reflect the kinds of self-assessment exercises and the
tutor marked problems you have previously encountered. All aspects of
the course will be assessed. You should use the time between
completing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire

         vii
CLL 817                                                COURSE GUIDE

course. You may find it useful to review yourself assessment exercises
and tutor marked assignments before the examination.

COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken
down.

Assessment                      Marks

Assignments 1-4 (the best three Four assignments. Best three marks

of all the assignments submitted) of the four count at 30% of course

                                marks.

Final examination               70% of overall course score

Total                           100% of course score.

COURSE OVERVIEW AND PRESENTATION SCHEDULE

Module      Title of Work                   Weeks     Assessment
Module 1                                              (End of Unit)
Unit 1                                      Activity  Assignment 1
Unit 2                                                Assignment 2
Unit 3      Course Guide                              Assignment 3
Unit 4                                                Assignment 4
            Development and Sources of 1
Unit 5                                                Assignment
Unit 6      Sale of Goods Law                         Assignment

            Nature and Definition of Sale 1

            of Goods

            Subject Matter of Sale of 2

            Goods

            Sale of Goods Distinguished 2

            from Other Commercial

            Transactions

            Essential Elements of a 3

            Contract of Sale of Goods

            Formalities for the Formation 3

            of a Contract of Sale of Goods

Module 2 UNIT 1 - Terms of Contract         4 Assignment 5

Unit 1

Unit 2 - Terms Implied By Statutes          4 Assignment 6

Unit 3 Exclusion Clause and 5 Assignment 7

            Fundamental Breach

Module 3 Unit 1 ­ The Concept of 6 Assignment 8

Unit 1 Property.

Unit 2 Passing of Property in 6 Assignment 9

            Unconditional Sale of Specific

            Goods.

Unit 3 Factors Negating Application 6 Assignment 10

viii
CLL 817                                  COURSE GUIDE

         of Rule 1 of Section 18

Unit 4   Passing of Property in 7        Assignment 10

         Unascertained or Future

         Goods.

Module 4 Unit 1 ­ Transfer of title by 8 Assignment 11

Unit 1 non-Owner.

Unit 2   Exemption to the Doctrine of 8  Assignment 12

         Nemo Dat Quo Non Habeat

Module 5 Unit 1 - Duties of the Seller.  9 Assignment 14

Unit 1

Unit 2 Duties of the Buyer.              9 Assignment 15

Unit 3 Remedies of the Seller            10 Assignment 16

Unit 4 Remedies of the Buyer.            10 Assignment 17

Unit 5   Factors Affecting liability 11 Assignment 18

         under contract of Sales of

         Goods.

Module 6 Definition of E-Commercial 12 Assignment 19

Unit I   Contracts

Unit 2   Formation of E-Commercial 12 Assignment 20

         Contract

Unit 3   Various Payment Devices         12 Assignment 21

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE

In distance learning, the study units replace the lecturer. The advantage
is that you can read and work through the study materials at your pace,
and at a time and place that suits you best. Think of it as reading the
lecture instead of listening to a lecturer. Just as a lecturer might give you
in-class exercise, you study units provide exercises for you to do at
appropriate times.

Each of the study units follows the same format. The first item is an
introduction to the subject matter of the unit and how a particular unit is
integrated with other units and the course as a whole. Next is a set of
Learning Outcomes, which let you know what you should be able to do
by the time you have completed the unit. You should use these Learning
Outcomes to guide your study. When you have finished the unit, you
should go back and check whether you have achieved the Learning
Outcomes. If you make a habit of doing this, you will significantly
improve your chances of passing the course.

Self Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout the units.
Working through these tests will help you to achieve the Learning
Outcomes of the unit and prepare you for the assignments and the
examination. You should do each Self-Assessment Exercise as you

                                         ix
CLL 817  COURSE GUIDE

come to it in the study unit. There will be examples given in the study
units. Work through these when you have come to them.

TUTORS AND TUTORIALS

There are 15 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You
will be notified of the dates, times and location of the tutorials, together
with the name and phone number of your tutor, as soon as you are
allocated a tutorial group.

Your tutor will mark and comment on your assignments. Keep a close
watch on your progress and on any difficulties you might encounter.
Your tutor may help and provide assistance to you during the course.
You must send your Tutor Marked Assignments to your tutor well
before the due date. They will be marked by your tutor and returned to
you as soon as possible.

Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if you need
help. Contact your tutor if;

 You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned
        readings;

 You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises;
 You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your

        tutor's comments on an assignment or with the grading of an
        assignment.

You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance
to have face to face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are
answered instantly. You can raise any problem encountered in the
course of your study. To gain the maximum benefit from course
tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them. You will gain a
lot from participating actively.

SUMMARY

This course deals with development of sale of goods law, nature and
definition of sale of goods, the subject matter of sale of goods, formation
of the sale of goods contract; sale of goods distinguished from other
commercial transactions, essential elements of a contract of sale of
goods, formalities for the formation of a contract of sale of goods, terms
of contract, exclusion clauses, fundamental terms and fundamental
breach.

x
CLL 817  COURSE GUIDE

Concept of property and passing off property; duties of the seller; duties
of the buyer; effect of contract; remedies; e-commercial contracts,
formation of e-commercial contract , various payment devices

         xi
  MAIN
COURSE

CONTENT                                  PAGE

MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION....................... 1

Unit 1   Development and Sources of
         Sale of Goods Law............................ 1
Unit 2   Nature and Definition of Sale of Goods.... 5
Unit 3   Subject Matter of Sale of Goods............. 8
Unit 4   Sale of Goods Distinguished from
         Other Commercial Transactions.............. 12
Unit 5   Essential Elements of a Contract of
         Sale of Goods................................... 16
Unit 6   Formalities for the Formation of a
         Contract of Sale of Goods.................... 23

MODULE 2 PASSING OF PROPERTY............. 27

Unit 1   Terms of Contract............................... 27
Unit 2
Unit 3   Terms Implied by Statute....................... 34

         Exclusion Clauses, Fundamental

         Terms and Fundamental Breach.............  39

MODULE 3 PASSING OF PROPERTY............. 42

Unit 1   The Concept of Property....................... 42
Unit 2   Passing of property in Specific Goods........ 44
Unit 3   Factors Negating the Application of
         Rule 1 of Section 18............................. 50
Unit 4   Passing of Property in Unascertained
         or Future Goods.................................. 56

MODULE 4 TRANSFER OF TITLE
               TO NON-OWNER.......................... 63

Unit 1   Transfer of title by non-Owner................. 63
Unit 2   Exception to the doctrine of Nemo
         Dat Quod Non Habet................................ 67
MODULE 5  DUTIES OF, AND REMEDIES
          FOR THE SELLERS AND
          THE BUYERS.............................. 73

Unit 1  Duties of the Seller.......................................... 73
Unit 2  Duties of the Buyer......................................... 78
Unit 3  Remedies of the Seller..................................... 82
Unit 4  Remedies of the Buyer..................................... 88
Unit 5  Factors Affecting liability under
        contract of Sales of Goods................................ 92

MODULE 6  E-COMMERCIAL
          CONTRACTS AND VARIOUS
          PAYMENT DEVICES.................... 95

Unit 1  Definition of E-Commercial Contracts............... 95
Unit 2
Unit 3  Formation of E-Commercial Contract ............  100

        Various Payment Devices.....................     103
CLL 817                                                MODULE 1

MODULE 1 INTRODUCTION

UNIT 1   DEVELOPMENT AND SOURCES OF SALE OF
         GOODS LAW

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Development and Sources of Sale of Goods Law

        1.3.1 Development of Sale of Goods Law
        1.3.2 Sources of Sale of Goods Law in Nigeria
1.4 Summary
1.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
1.6 Possible Answer to Self-Assignment

1.1 Introduction

The contract of sale of goods is one of the oldest forms of commercial
transaction globally, from the practice of trade by barter to the
introduction and use of legal tender. The applicable law over the years
has evolved to its present stance. From the introduction of the bill in
England to its application in Nigeria is the focus of this unit. The
understanding of the evolution of sale of goods law is necessary to
appreciate the past and the present reality as it pertains to sale of goods
and the various sources of sale of goods law in Nigeria.

1.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit you are expected to be able to:

 trace the historical development of sale of goods law
 discuss the development of sale of goods law
 identify the sources of sale of goods law in Nigeria.

1.3 The Development and Sources of Sale of Goods Law

4.3.1 The Development of Sale of Goods Law

The contract of sale of goods is one of the earliest and most important
forms of commercial contract. The modern law is traceable to the 19th
century. In 1889, Sir Mackezie Chalmers drafted the Sale of Goods Bill
which Lord Hershell introduced to the House of Lord in United
Kingdom for evaluation and criticism. The bill metamorphosed into Sale
of Goods Act, 1893. The Sale of Goods Act, 1893 greatly influenced
the USA's Uniform Sales Act, 1906 which was replaced by Uniform
Commercial Code, 1952. The English Sale of Goods Act 1893 has gone

                                                                                                      1
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

through series of amendments and these amendments are codified in the
Sale of Goods Act, 1979. The Act regulates the English contract law
and UK commercial law in respect of goods that are sold and bought.

In Nigeria, sales of goods is governed by the provision of the Sale of
Goods Act, 1893. The Act is a statute of general application in force in
England before 1900 received into Nigeria through local statutes
(Section 45 of the Interpretation Act Cap 19 Laws of Federation of
Nigeria 2004). Prior to the Nigerian independence from the British
government in1960, various Acts of British Parliament were made for or
extended to Nigeria being a British colony. The Sale of Goods Act, 1983
is one of such laws that continue to apply even after independence. The
Act is applicable across the federation except in the states where they
have their Sale of Goods laws. States that have their Sale of Good Law
include Lagos and Sates in the former Western Region where the Sale of
Goods Act has been repealed and replaced by the Sale of Goods Law,
1959. In order words, States of the Northern and Eastern regions are
presently using Sale of Goods Act, 1893. It is pertinent to note that even
in States that have Sale of Goods Law, the provisions are similar and
identical with the Act (See Berende v Usman (2004) 12 FWLR0 (PT
241) CA 453, 477.

The regulation of sales of goods in Nigeria is not limited to the Sale of
Goods Act and State laws. The rules of Common Law and the principles
equity including the Merchant usage which are not inconsistent with the
express provisions of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 or State Laws are also
applicable. This is made possible by section 45 of the Interpretation Act
of 1965 (Cap 19 LFN 2004) that provides thus:

        Subject to the provisions of this section and except in so far as
other provision is made by any federal law, the common law of England
and the doctrine of equity, together with statute of general application
that were in force in England on the 1st day of January, 1900 in so far as
they relate to any matter within the exclusive legislative competence
shall be in force ... in Lagos ... elsewhere in the Federation.

The effect of the provision above is that principle of common law equity
and statute of general application will continue to apply subject to any
law made by the federal government. While it is not expressly stated in
the above provision the supremacy of the Sale of Goods Law enacted by
a State in Nigeria, the issue was settled by the Court in Henry Stephens
Engineering v Complete Home Enterprise Nig. Ltd (1987) 1NSCC 21.
The Supreme Court held that the judgment of the lower courts were
valid only because they were in accordance with the provision of the
then existing local statute which section 15(2) of the Sale of Good Law
of Lagos State. Like other States, section 15(2) of the Lagos Sale of

2
CLL 817  MODULE 1

Goods Law was a reenactment of the exact wordings of section 14(2) of
the Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Another worrisome issue is the use of Statute of general application,
years after independence and years of democratic dispensation in
Nigeria. The prime duty of the parliament is law-making and one would
have expected that by now that Nigeria Sale of Good Act should have
been enacted by the National Assembly and domesticated by all the
States of the federation.

4.3.2 The Sources of Sale of Goods Law in Nigeria

The above discussion clearly reveals the various sources of sale of goods
law in Nigeria to include:

1) Sale of Goods Act 1893 ­ This is a statute of general application
        in force in England before 1 January 1900. It is an English Statute
        received into Nigeria by local statute.

2) Sale of Goods Laws enacted by States in Nigeria.
3) Rules of Common Law ­ such as the general principle of

        contracts.
4) Principles of equity.
5) The law merchants.
6) Case Law/Precedent: The court often in the course of interpreting

        statutes creates body of legal principles. By doctrine of precedent,
        decision of a higher court is binding on a lower court.
        Section 62 of Sale of Goods Act validates the application of 3-5
        sources above.

                      SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 1

              Examine the development of sale of goods law in Nigeria.

1.4 Summary

This unit examines the development of sales of goods law, the
application of the Sale of Goods Act in Nigeria, the enactment of sale of
Goods law in different states in Nigeria and application of rule of
Common Law and principle of Equity to sale of goods in Nigeria.
Although, the contract of sale of goods is one of the earliest forms of
commercial contract, the modern law in this area of law is traceable to
the 19th century. The applicable laws to sales of goods in Nigeria include
the Sale of Goods Acts and States' Sale of Goods Laws.

         3
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

1.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Sources

The Sale of Goods Act, 1893

The Sale of Goods Act 1979 (c 54) of the United Kingdom

Akanki E A, Commercial Law in Nigeria (University of Lagos Press,
        2007) 267

George Etomi, An Introduction to Commercial Law in Nigeria: Text,
        Cases and Materials MIJ Professional Publisher 2014) 144.

Fagam P.K. `Sale of Goods' Akanki E A (Ed) Commercial Law in
        Nigeria (University of Lagos Press, 2007) 267

Moneylenders Law, Cap. M7, Laws of Cross River State of Nigeria,
        2004 and

Moneylenders Law, Cap. M7, Laws of Lagos State of Nigeria, 2003

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The contract of sale of goods is one of the earliest and most important
forms of commercial contract. The modern law is traceable to the 19th
century when in 1889, Sir Mackezie Chalmers drafted the Sale of Goods
Bill which Lord Hershell introduced to the House of Lord in United
Kingdom for evaluation and criticism. The bill metamorphosed into Sale
of Goods Act, 1893. The Sale of Goods Act, 1893 greatly influenced
the USA's Uniform Sales Act, 1906 which was replaced by Uniform
Commercial Code, 1952. The English Sale of Goods Act 1893 has gone
through series of amendments and these amendments are codified in the
Sale of Goods Act, 1979. The Act regulates the English contract law
and UK commercial law in respect of goods that are sold and bought. In
Nigeria, sale of goods is governed by the provision of the Sale of Goods
Act, 1893. Section 45 of Interpretation Act made possible the
application of English Law in Nigeria. States in Nigeria have also
enacted Sale of Goods Law which is a replica of the Sale of Goods Act.
It also regulated by principle of common law and equity.

4
CLL 817  MODULE 1

UNIT 2 NATURE AND DEFINITION OF SALE OF
               GOODS

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Nature and Definition of Sale of Goods

        2.3.1 Nature of Sale of Goods
        2.3.2 Definition of Sale of Goods
2.4 Summary
2.5 Reference/Further Readings/web sources
2.6 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

2.1 Introduction

The contract of sale of goods is a special kind of contract. Not all
transfer of goods qualifies a sale of goods. There are certain elements
that make the sale of goods a unique kind of contract. This unit
examines the nature and definition of sale of goods.

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit, you should be able to discuss the meaning and
nature of contract of sale of goods.

2.3 Nature of Contract of Sale of Goods

The nature of contract of sale of goods is that it is an agreement between
the seller and the buyer for the sale of goods in which the transfer of
property in the goods from the seller to the buyer must be for a money
consideration call the price. It is a specialised area of contract that
involves the sale of goods. The sale of goods is essentially a part of law
of contract. Consequently, the laws regulating sales of goods do not
exclude the general rules relating to the general contract. Therefore, the
principles of offer and acceptance, consideration and other elements of a
valid contract must be present in a contract of Sale of Goods. It is
special because in addition to the above ordinary elements of general
contract, goods and money consideration must be present in every sale
of goods contract.

2.3.1 Meaning of Sales of Goods

The question therefore is what is sales of goods? Sales of goods is
defined in section 1(1) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 as "A contract

                                                                                                      5
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

whereby the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to
the buyer for a money consideration called the price".

This implication of the above definition as noted above is that two other
elements: the sale object of goods and money consideration, must also
be present together with the ordinary elements of a contract for a
contract of sale of goods to be valid. Furthermore, the above definition
envisages two situations namely: contract of sale and agreement to sell
(Section 62(1) of the Act).

1) A contract of sale: This is a sale of goods in which the property in
        the goods is transferred from the seller to the buyer at the time of
        sale. It "includes a bargain and sale as well as a sale and delivery"
        (See Section 61(1) of the Act).

2) An agreement to sell: This is where the transfer of the property
        takes place at a future time or upon condition upon occurrence of
        an event. The property only passes upon lapse of such time or a
        fulfillment of certain conditions that crystalizes into the transfer
        of property in the goods to the buyer (see section 1(4) of the Act.

A typical example is a contract for the sale of goods yet to be
manufactured because the property in the goods cannot pass until they
are manufactured and ascertained.

Therefore, the sales of good is either absolute or conditional (see section
1(3) of the Act). The recognition of these two forms of contract of sales
is further emphasized and made clearer by section 1(3) of the Act which
states that, where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is
transferred from the seller to the buyer, the contract is called a sale; but
where the transfer of the property in the goods is to take place at a future
time or subject to some conditions thereafter to be fulfilled, the contract
is called an agreement to sell.

In Bello v Adefowope (1974) NCLR 153, 158-159, Bakare J in drawing
a distinction between the two classes of contract of sales noted that
agreement to sell is an executory contract of sale which contract is pure
and simple, in which a jus in persona is created, while sale, an executed
contract is a contract plus conveyance in which a jus in rem is created.

  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 2

   Critically undertake an appraisal of the nature and meaning
   of Sales of Goods contract.

6
CLL 817  MODULE 1

2.4 Summary

We examined the true nature of contract of sale of goods and the
meaning of sale of good under the Act A contract of sale of goods arises
where the seller transfers or agrees to transfer property in good in
exchange of money consideration called the price. This makes the
contract of sale of goods a special kind.

2.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
The Sale of Goods Act, 1893
The Sale of Goods Act 1979 (c 54) of the United Kingdom
Akanki E A, Commercial Law in Nigeria (University of Lagos Press,

        2007) 267
George Etomi, An Introduction to Commercial Law in Nigeria: Text,

        Cases and Materials MIJ Professional Publisher 2014) 144.
Fagam P.K. `Sale of Goods' Akanki E A (Ed) Commercial Law in

        Nigeria (University of Lagos Press, 2007) 267

2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The answer should address the nature and meaning of Sale of Goods contract.
The transfer of property in the goods is the nature. Sale of goods is defined
in section 1(1) of the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 as "A contract whereby
the seller transfers or agrees to transfer the property in goods to the
buyer for a money consideration called the price".

         7
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 3 THE SUBJECT MATTER OF SALE OF GOODS

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Subject Matter of Sale of Goods

        3.3.1 Definition of Goods
        3.3.2 Classification of Goods
3.4 Summary
3.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction

The contract of sale of goods is a special kind of contract because it
demands of additional elements of money consideration for the subject
matter, goods. This unit focuses on the subject matter of contract of sale
of goods and its classification.

3.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit, you shall be able to discuss and analyse the
subject matter of sale of goods and its classification.

3.3 Subject Matter of Sales of Goods

The demand by the Act that the subject matter of the contract of sales of
goods must be goods begs the question of what the meaning of goods
and its classification is.

3.3.1 Definition of Goods

The term "goods" is defined by section 62(1) of the Act to

Include all chattels personal other than things in action and money, ...
all corporeal, moveables except money. The term includes emblements,
industrial growing crops, and things attached to or forming part of the
land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the contract of
sale.

Therefore, the term goods under sale of goods law means things other
than land or real property, choses in Action and money. The various
components of goods listed by the Act are further examined below.

8
CLL 817  MODULE 1

1) Chattel Personal:

These are tangible personal things such as car, clothes, shoes and
animals. They are regarded as goods. This excludes real property also
known as chattel real and things attached to the land such as minerals
except separated from the land as goods. Things in action are intangible
such as shares and negotiable instruments as well as money are not
regarded as goods. Ovieghara notes that "the definition is clear that real
property, chattel seal, choses in action and money are not goods. Where
money becomes antiquity, it will be goods'' (Ovieghara, Sale of Goods
Law (1996 Malthouse Press Ltd) 4). Money can only qualify as goods
when it is being sold as old currency over and above its face value.

2) Emblements:

These are products of the land which do not grow naturally but are the
annual results of agricultural labour of man or a combination of man's
skill and machine. They include maize, maize potatoes etc (Akanki EA
269). They are regarded as goods.

3) Industrial Growing Crops:

They also known as fructus industrialis and they include thing grown by
industry of man. It is like emblements but it has wider scope than the
emblements because it is not limited to crops that are produced annually.
They are regarded as goods.

4) Things Attached to and Forming Part of the Land:

These are also called fructus naturalis. They include things that growing
naturally on the land such as grass, timbers, traditional palm tree, Raffia
palm tree, etc. They are regarded as goods only if severed from the land
before sale or agreed to be severed before sale.

3.3.2 Classification of Goods

Goods, the subject matter of contract of sale of goods may be classified
into the following:

1) Existing Goods

These are goods that are owned or possessed by the seller at the time of
contract. They are goods actually in existence when the contract is
made. Existing goods may either be specific or unascertained.

                                                                                                      9
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

2) Specific Goods

These are goods identified and agreed upon at the time the contract of
sale was made (section 62 of the Act). For example, if Mr. James
walked into a car shop and buys a 2009 Rhumba Motor Boat with
Engine number 10465 and chassis number AB60421. The car is specific
goods. See Mary Ajayi v Alice Ebun (1964) MNLR 4.

3) Ascertained Goods

The Act did not define ascertained goods. It is the opposite of
ascertained goods. It means those goods identified in accordance with
the agreement after the contract of sale of goods is made. The difference
between ascertained and specific goods is the time of identification of
the goods. The identification time for specific goods is during the
contract of sale while ascertained goods, the identification is after the
contract of sale of goods is made.

4) Unascertained Goods (Goods Sold by Description)

As the name implies, these are goods sold by description, meaning they
are not identified, agreed upon or ascertained at the time of the contract
but are included in a particular class of goods. A good example is sale of
"30 inches of 18 kilogrammes mahogany wood". It covers:

(a) The sale of purely generic goods
(b) The sale of part of a whole or larger quantity of goods
(c) The sale of goods to be manufacture, acquired or grown by the

        seller

5) Future Goods

These are futuristic goods. They are goods not yet in existence or goods
in existence but not yet acquired by the seller. That is to say, goods yet
to be acquired or manufactured by the seller after the contract have been
made. In Howell v Coupland (1876) 1 Q.B. 258, the plaintiff contracted
with the defendant to buy 200 tons of potatoes to be grown specifically
from the defendant's land. The court held the contract to be a sale of
specific goods, despite the fact that they were not existing goods.

               SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 3
    Examine the concept of `goods' and its classification

10
CLL 817                                                   MODULE 1

3.4 Summary

The unit exposed the learners to the understanding of the definition of
goods, the disparities between different types of goods and the
explanation of different categories of goods. This unit has exposed
learners to the subject matter of sale of goods. The classification of
goods into various categories such as the specific goods, future goods,
existing goods and ascertained or unascertained goods was also
thoroughly discussed.

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Laws of the Federation, 1990 Hire Purchase Act, Cap 169.

Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London Press, (2007)

Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana ­ Fep Publishers
Limited, (1992).

3.5 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The term "goods" is defined by section 62(1) of the Act to include all
chattels personal other than things in action and money, ... all
corporeal, moveable except money. The term includes emblements,
industrial growing crops, and things attached to or forming part of
the land which are agreed to be severed before sale or under the
contract of sale. The classification include existing, specific,
ascertain, unascertained and future

                                                              11
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 4 SALE OF GOODS DISTINGUISHED FROM
               OTHER COMMERCIAL TRANSACTIONS

4.1 Introduction
4.2 Learning Outcomes
4.3 Sale of Goods Distinguished from Other Commercial

        Transactions
        4.3.1 Gift
        4.3.2 Exchange
        4.3.3 Bailment
        4.3.4 Hire purchase
        4.3.4 Loan
4.4 Summary
4.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
4.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

4.1 Introduction

To the layman any transfer of goods from person to another and sale of
any item qualify as sale of goods. There are certain commercial
transactions that are related to sale of goods but which in context differ.
This unit focuses on drawing a clear demarcation between a contract of
sale of goods and other commercial transactions that many persons
mistakenly regard as sale of goods.

4.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit you should be able to:
     distinguish between contract of sale of goods and other related
        commercial transactions.
     analyse the salient features of contract of sale of goods and other
        related commercial transactions.

4.3 Sale of Goods and Other Transactions

Sale of Goods is distinguishable from other similar commercial
transactions. Some of these related transactions include exchange,
bailment, hire purchase, gift, and loan.

4.3.1 Sale and Exchange

The consideration required under section 1(1) of the Act must be money
whereas an exchange involves a transfer of goods for other goods. A

12
CLL 817  MODULE 1

contract of exchange simply means the giving of goods to the person in
exchange for the other person's goods known as trade by barter. In other
words, money, which is a prerequisite for a contract of sale, is not
involved in a contract of exchange. In exchange of goods for goods, the
property in the goods passes without any money consideration

The issue that may arise where goods are exchange for part goods and
part money is as to whether such transaction could be regarded a sale of
goods transaction. In Adridge v. Johnson ((1857) 7 E&B 885), A made
a deal with K to exchange 32 bullocks for 100 quarters of barley. They
valued the bullocks at £6 each which came to the total of £192 in all and
the barley at £215 and agreed that the difference of £23 would be paid in
cash. The court held the transaction to be a contract of sale of goods

4.3.2 Sale and Bailment

A bailment is a transaction under which goods are delivered by one
party (the bailor) to another (the bailee), on certain specified terms,
which generally provide that the bailee is to have possession of the
goods and subsequently redeliver then to the bailor in accordance with
his instruction. The property in the goods is not intended to and does not
pass on delivery of possession to the bailee, and in fact remains with the
bailor, though it may sometimes be the intention of the parties that it
should pass in due course, as in the case of ordinary hire purchase
contract.

In sale, on the other hand, there is usually an indication that the property
in the goods would pass to the other party in the transaction. In other
words, in a contract of bailment there is no transfer of property in the
goods from the bailor to the bailee, whereas in the case of sale, the
property in the goods should be transferred from the seller to the buyer

4.3.3 Sale and Hire Purchase

Generally, contracts of hire purchase resemble contract of sale very
closely, and indeed in practically all cases of hire-purchase, the ultimate
sale of the goods is the real object of the transaction. The distinction
between them is very clear and extremely important at this initial stage.

A contract of sale involves two parties, the buyer and the seller, whereas
a hire purchase transaction most cases involve three parties to it, namely,
the seller of the goods who sells them to finance a company, which in
turn leaves the goods on hire purchase terms to the hirer (who may not
become the buyer if he defaults or refused to exercise his option to
purchase).

         13
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

Under a hire purchase transaction (as it shall be seen later) the
hirer,(who may or may not become the buyer) has possession of the
goods and is entitled to their use, although he is not the owner.
4.3.4 Sale and Gift

A gift is an immediate, voluntary and gratuitous transfer of any property
from one person to another. In other words, it is a transfer of property
without any consideration. If no valuable consideration is given, gift is
not a sale. Delivery is essential to make a gift of a chattel at common
law valid unless by deed.

Sometimes, problems arise with regard to transactions in which what is
regarded as "free" gift is offered as a condition of entering into some
other transaction. In Esso Petroleum Ltd. v Commissioner of Customs
and Excise (1976) 1 ALL ER 117 or 1 WLR 1, a promotion scheme of
supplier offered a "free" medallion to every motorist who bought four
gallons of petrol. The question arose whether the medallion was itself
the subject of a sale or indeed of a contract at all. A majority of the
House of Lord held that there was no "sale", but was divided on the
question whether this was because there was no consideration or
whether there was no contract at all but merely the promise of a gift, for
want of any intention to create a legally binding relationship.

4.3.5 Sale and Loan

A party wishing to borrow money may use his property or goods as
security for the loan. In this situation the lender retains the possession of
the goods or the title document until the loan is paid in accordance with
the agreed terms. This arrangement is expressly excluded by section
61(4) of the Sale of Goods Act.

     SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 4
Critically examine sale of goods and other
related transactions.

4.4 Summary

Through this unit, learners have been able to know the distinction
between sale of Goods and exchange, bailment, hire-purchase, gift and
loan. This unit has exposed learners to the distinction between sale of
goods and other commercial transactions like exchange, bailment, hire-
purchase, gift and loan.

14
CLL 817                                                 MODULE 1

4.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London, (2007)

Igweike, Nigerian Commercial Law, Sale of Goods, Malthouse Law
        Books, (second edition) 2001

Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, 1992.

John Alemo Musa Agbinika and Josephine Aladi Achor Agbonika, Sale

of Goods, 2009

ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

The answer will cover differentiating sale from loan, bailment in which
        there is no transfer of property in the goods as is the case of sale
        of goods.

                                                        15
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 5 ESSENTIAL ELEMENTS IN THE FORMATION
               OF CONTRACT OF SALE OF GOODS

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Learning Outcomes
5.3 Essential Elements in the Formation of Contract of Sale of Goods

        5.3.1 Offer
        5.3.2 Acceptance
        5.3.3 Consideration
        5.3.4 Intention to Create of Legal Relation
        5.3.5 Goods
        5.3.6 Price
5.4 Summary
5.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
5.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction

The creation of a contract for the sale of goods is a matter governed by
the general principles of contract as they exist either under common law
or as modified by statutory provisions and the sale of goods law. It
follows therefore, that a proper grounding on the basic principles of
contract is a condition precedent to the appreciation of the principles
governing the creation of the contract of sale of goods. As noted earlier,
contract of sale of goods is special kind as it demands of additional two
elements to the ordinary elements of a valid contract. In Metibaiye v
Narelli ((2009) 16 NWLR (PT 1197) 326, 346-347), Aboki JCA held
that "the elemets of a valid contract are offer, acceptance, consideration,
intention to create legal relationship and capacity". These elements are
the focus of this unit.

1.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit you should be able to discuss the basic ingredients
or elements required for the creation of a valid sale of goods contract.

1.3 Essential Elements in the Formation of Contract of Sale
       of Goods

5.3.1 Capacity to Buy and Sell

The parties ­ the seller and buyer must possess the legal capacity to
make a contract of sale of goods. As required, under the general law

16
CLL 817  MODULE 1

governing capacity to enter into a valid contract, both parties to a sale of
goods contract must have the requisite capacity to enter into the contract
relationship. Section 2 of the Act leaves the regulation of capacity to be
governed by the general law of contract and provides that where
necessaries are sold and delivered to an infant, or minor, or to a person
who by reason of mental incapacity or drunkenness is incompetent and
lack capacity, he or she must pay a reasonable price for them (See Infant
Relief Act 1874 and infant Law 1959, Child Rights Act, Labinjo v
Abake (1924) 5 NLR 33 and Peters v. Fleming (1840) 6).

The Proviso to section 2 of the Act defines necessaries as "goods
suitable to the condition in life of such infant or minor or other person,
and to his actual requirements at the time of the sale and delivery".
However, for an infant to be liable for supply necessaries it must be
established that such supplies of goods is suitable to the infant's
condition of life and that he had no adequate supply of them already
(Nash v Inman (1908) KB 1.

5.3.2 Offer

An offer may be defined as a definite undertaking or promise, made
by one party with the intention that it shall become binding on the
party making it as soon as it is accepted by the party to whom it is
addressed. The person making the offer is called the offeror, and the
person to whom it is addressed, the offeree. See Orient Bank (Nig.) Plc
v Bilante Int'l Ltd (1997) 8 NWLR (Pt 515) 76; Carlill v Carbolic
Smoke Ball Co. (1893) 1 Q.B.253. The distinction between an offer and
invitation to treat is that offer serves to bind the parties upon its
acceptance, while invitation to treat merely initiates a negotiation which
may or may not lead to an offer. (See BFI Croup Corp. v Bureau of
Public Enterprise (2012) 7 SC Pt 111; Gibson v Manchester City
Council (1979) UKHL 6.

The display of goods in shelves, in a shop, supermarket and the
advertisement of goods in newspaper, circular and trade catalogue are
regarded as an invitation to treat. An offer can be made expressly or by
conduct (impliedly). However, for a proposition to amount to an offer
capable of acceptance, it must satisfy three conditions.

1) It must be definite, certain and unequivocal
2) The proposition must emanate from the person liable to be

        bound if the terms are accepted by the offeree.
3) The offer must be communicated to the offeree.

The circumstances that may lead to the termination of an offer are death,
lapse of time, rejection by the offeree, and revocation.

                                                                                                     17
CLL 817     LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

Acceptance

Acceptance is defined as the final expression of assent to the terms of
an offer by the offeree. It is an agreement of the offeree to enter into
legally binding contract with the offeror (See Akinyemi v Odu'a
Investment Co. Ltd. (2012) 1 SC (Pt IV) 43). Thereby, by
acceptance, the offeree indicates his intention and willingness to be
bound by the terms of the offer from the offeror. When an offer is
accepted, it is transformed to a promise and a breach of it will give rise
to an action.

An acceptance like an offer may be made by word of mouth, in
writing, or by conduct. It must be made while the offer is still in force,
and once accepted it is complete and the offer becomes irrevocable.

1) Conditions for Validity of Acceptance

The following conditions must exist for an acceptance to be valid.

a) The acceptance must be unqualified. Hart v Mills (1846)15 L.J.
        Exch 200.

b) An acceptance must not be conditional. See Odufundade v
        Ososami (1972) U.I.L.R. 101

c) An offer can only be accepted by the person to whom it is made
        or by his agent duly authorized. But where an offer is made to the
        public at large, any member of the public may accept it (see
        Carlill v Carbolic Smokeball Co.(supra).

d) An acceptance must be made not only with full knowledge of the
        offer but also in reliance on it. The question is whether
        acceptance in ignorance of offer can be enforced. Affirmative
        answer was given in Neville v Kelly (1962) 12 CBNS, 740) and
        Gibson v Proctor ((1981) 64 LT. 594). But these decisions have
        be criticize and the criticism upheld in the United State, Australia
        and South Africa.

e) Acceptance must be communicated
f) Acceptance may be affected in the following circumstances:

         i. If the offeror prescribes or indicates a particular method of
                acceptances, and the offeree accepts in that way. There
                will be a contract, even though the offeror does
                not know of the acceptance.

         ii. Acceptance communicated to a duly authorized agent of
                the offeror is effective in law.

         iii. Where acceptance is governed by the rule in Adams
                Lindsell (1818)1 B and Ald 681, i.e, acceptance made

18
CLL 817  MODULE 1

         by postal correspondence, e.g, by letter or telegram. Here, where
         the acceptance is by post it is complete as soon as it is posted.
         Delay in transit or loss of the letter of acceptance does not affect
         the validity of the contract.

iv. Where the offeror himself expressly or impliedly states the need
        for communication.

v. Communication of acceptance is waived impliedly, i.e, is deemed
        to be waived where it is to take the form of the performance of an
        act, as in the case of unilateral contracts.

2) Modes of Communication

a) Where a particular mode is prescribed. The mode must be used.

However, in Manchester Diocesan Council for Education v.
Commercial and General Investment Ltd. (1969)3 ALL E.R. 1593,
Buckley, J, approved this view that the offeree could employ an equally
or more expeditious mode than that prescribed by the offeror, if it cannot
be expressly shown that the offeror had only one mode of acceptance in
mind. Yet, a lot depend on the LEARNING OUTCOME for the
prescription of the particular mode of acceptance of offer.

b) Where no particular mode is prescribed, the offeree is expected to
        respond according to the nature of the offer. If the offer is made
        orally, oral acceptance suffices.

c) Where Acceptance is By Post. Herschell, L.J. in Henthorn v
        Fraser (1892)2 Ch. 27, at page 33 stated thus;

Where the circumstances are such that it must have been within the
contemplation of the parties, that, according to the ordinary usage of
mankind, the post might be used as a means of communicating the
acceptances of an offer, the acceptance is complete as soon as it is
posted.

5.3.3 Consideration

The most illustrative and applied definition of consideration is that of
Lush J., in Curie v Misa (1875) L. R. 10 Exch 153 at 162 where he said:
A valuable consideration in the eye of the law may consist either in
some right, interest, profit or benefit accruing to one party, or some
forbearance, detriment, loss or responsibility, given, suffered or
undertaken by the other. Thus consideration does not only consist of
profit by one party but also exist where the other party abandoning some
legal rights in the present, or limits his legal freedom of motion in the
future as an inducement for the promise of the first. So it is irrelevant

                                                                                                     19
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

whether one party benefits but enough that he accepts the consideration
that the party giving it does thereby undertake some burden or lose
something which is in contemplation of law may be of valve.

The following rules are applicable to consideration.

1) A moral obligation does not constitute consideration. See
        Eastwood v Kenyon (1840)11 A & E 438.

2) Consideration must Move from the Promisee.
3) Consideration may be executory or executed but must not be past.

Past consideration is subject to two exceptions: debt barred by statute
could be revived by acknowledgement and antecedent debts or liability
is a valuable consideration for a bill.

4) Consideration must have value but need not be adequate.
5) Consideration must not be illegal.
6) A promised to perform an existing obligation (imposed by law or

        contract) is not a consideration

See Gbadamosi v Mbadiwe (1964)2 All N.L.R. 19; Egware v Shell BP
Petrol Development Company of Nigeria (Unreported) Midwestern High
Court, Suit NO. VHC/36/70 delivered on April 30, 1971; U.T.C. v Hauri
(1940)6 W.A.C.A. 148.

5.3.4 Intention to Create Legal Relation

There is the view that the intention between the parties to a contract does
not form the bedrock of the formation of a contract. On this, Professor
Williston stated that:

"The common law does not require any positive intention to create a
legal obligation as an element of contract ...... a deliberate promise
seriously made is enforced irrespective of the promisor's views
regarding his legal liability."
This quotation above has led to the categorization of agreement into
two: domestic and social engagements on one part and commercial
transactions on the other part.

1) Domestic and Social Engagements

In order to consider the presence or otherwise of the contractual
intention in agreements which are domestic and/or social in nature, there
is an assumption in law that the contractual intention is absent and the
parties to such an agreement cannot sue each other on it.

20
CLL 817  MODULE 1

Agreements are made every day in domestic and social life where the
parties do not intend to invoke the assistance of the courts, should the
engagements not be honoured. A promise to offer to trim a friend's
garden should not result in litigation. It is therefore obvious that in
addition to the phenomena of agreement and the presence of
consideration, a third contractual element ­ the intention to create legal
relations exists.

In Balfour v Balfour (1919)2 K.B 571 a Briton was employed by the
Government of Ceylon. He returned home on leave with his wife, but
the wife was unable to go back to Ceylon with him because of ill-health.
He then promised to make her an allowance of £30 a month until she
joined him. When he failed to make this payment, she sued him to
enforce the promise. The court of Appeal held that there was no contract
between the parties. As a natural consequence of their relationships,
spouses make numerous agreements involving payment of money and
its applications to the household themselves and their children.

In contradistinction to Balfour v Balfour is MCGregor v Mc Gregor
(1888)21 Q.B.D. 424, in that case it was held that when spouses are not
living in amity, particularly when their relationship has degenerated to
the level of mutual hostility and distrust, an agreement between them
would be binding.

However, where the performance of a domestic or social engagement
involves great sacrifice on the part of one or both parties, the
presumption against the presence of contractual intention may be
rebutted, particularly were the plaintiff has performed his own part of
the agreement. In Parker v Clark (1960)1 W.L.R. 286, on the invitation
of the defendant, who was the plaintiff's uncle, the plaintiff and his wife
sold their house and moved into the defendants house, it was also agreed
that the Parkers would share the living expenses with the Clarkes and
that Clarke would leave the house to Parker in his will. After quarrels
between the couples, the Clarkes attempted to evict the Parker on the
ground that the agreement was not a binding one. It was held to be
binding.

2) Commercial Agreements

Generally, the law presumes the presence of the contractual intention in
commercial agreements. It is therefore not surprising that there is hardly
a case in which the validity of a commercial agreement has been
challenged for absence of the contractual intentions.

In this class of cases, the courts presume that an intention to create legal
relations exists, unless and until the contrary is proved. Thus, in Carlill v

                                                                                                     21
CLL 817      LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

Carbolic Smoke Ball's Case (Supra) The defendants advertised their
anti-influenza capsules by offering to pay £100 to any purchaser who
bought and used it and yet caught influenza within a given period, and
by declaring that they had deposited £1, 000 with their bankers to show
their security. The plaintiff bought the capsule, used it and caught
influenza. The defendant, among others, raised the defense that they had
no legal relations with the plaintiff. This defense was rejected, and they
were held to be contractually bound.

However, the defendant may escape liability where the agreement itself
contains a clause expressly excluding the intention to enter into legal
relations like agreements on betting.

5.3.5 Goods

This is the subject matter of sale of goods. For detail discussion of this
element see unit 4 above. The subject of sale of goods must be goods for
a contract of sale of goods to be valid.

5.3.6 Price

The Act requires that the consideration for the transfer of property in the
goods must be money called price. Therefore, an exchange of goods for
goods is not a sale of goods; rather it is trade by barter. However, the
practice where the consideration is partly by goods and partly by money
that transaction qualifies for sale of goods (See Aldridge v Johnson
(supra)).

Section 8 of the Act provides for the mode of determining price which
may be fixed by the contract or may be left to be fixed in an agreed
manner or be determining by the course of dealing between the parties
and where the price is not determined by any of those modes the buyer
is to pay reasonable price. What is reasonable price depends on facts of
each case. In Matco Ltd v Santer Fe Development Co. ltd (1971)2
N.C.L.R.1, it was held that the burden was on the seller to prove that the
price he demanded was reasonable.

The section covers an existence of contractual relationship which fails to
state the agreed price. But this may well be the evidence that parties are
yet to reach an agreement (a consensus ad dem) which is an essential
element of contract of sale of goods as was upheld in May and Butcher
Ltd v R (1934) 2 KB, 17. In contrast, in Foley v Classique Coaches Ltd
(1934) 2KB 1, an agreement to supply petrol at a price to be agreed by
the parties was enforced. The rationale for decision was that the price
agreement formed part f the larger agreement by the parties. Section 9 of

22
CLL 817                                               MODULE 1

the Act provides for the fixing of price of goods by a third party and the
implication of failure to comply.

        SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERRCISE 5
Critically examine the essential elements of a valid
contract of sale of goods.

5.4 Summary

The most important message in this unit is that in certain essential
elements or ingredients are required to create a contract of sale of goods,
like other forms of contract, parties most have the capacity, offer,
acceptance, consideration, intention to enter into a contract; goods must
be the subject matter and money consideration called price. There is no
particular pattern, and it is generally governed by the Sale of Goods Act
of 1893 which, being a statute of general application is applicable in
Nigeria.

5.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

Sale of Goods Act, 1893.
        Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London, (2007)

Igweike, Commercial Law- Sale of Goods (2001)
        Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, 1992.

5.6 ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE
They are offer, acceptance, consideration and intention to enter into
legal relationship.

                                                                                                     23
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 6 FORMALITIES FOR THE FORMATION OF A
               CONTRACT OF SALE OF GOODS

6.1 Introduction
6.2 Learning Outcomes
6.3 Formalities for the Formation of a Contract of Sale of Goods
6.4 Summary
6.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
6.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

6.1 Introduction

The creation of contractual relation such as a contract sale of goods may
require a particular form or variety of forms for its creation. This unit
focuses on the formality or formalities require under the Act in forming
a contract of sale of goods.

6.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit, you will be able to discuss the formalities
required to form a contract of sale of goods.

6.3 Formalities for the Formation of a Contract of Sale of
       Goods

The Sale of Goods Act does not provide for special formalities in
making a contract of sale of goods. Section 3 of the Act titled formalities
for the contract provides that:

Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any statutes in that behalf, a
contract of sale may be made (either with or without seal), or by word of
mouth, or partly in writing and partly by word of mouth, or may be
implied from the conduct of the parties.

Provided that nothing in this section shall affect the law relating to
corporations.

The above provision provides for any of the following formalities in
making a contract of sale.

1) By seal: This is a sale by deed,
2) Agreement without seal,
3) Oral agreement: not in writing,

24
CLL 817                                  MODULE 1

4) Partly oral and partly in writing or
5) By conduct of the parties

The section is subject to any provision of this Act or and other law that
requires a special form in creating contract of sale of any particular
goods. It specifically in it proviso subjects this section to laws regulating
companies or corporations.

             SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 6

  Examine the formalities for the formation of contract of
  sale of goods in Nigeria.

6.4 Summary

The unit exposed the learners to the formalities for the formation or
creation of contract of sale of goods. The Act provide for varieties of
forms including oral, written, combination of oral and written agreement
or by the conduct of the seller and buyer

6.5 References/Further Reading/Web source

Laws of the Federation, 1990 Hire Purchase Act, Cap 169.
        Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London Press, (2007)
        Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana ­ Fep Publishers
        Limited, (1992).

6.6 ANSWER TO SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE
The formalities are:

    i. By seal: This is a sale by deed,
    ii. Agreement without seal,
    iii. Oral agreement: not in writing,
    iv. Partly oral and partly in writing or
    v. By conduct of the parties

                                                                                                     25
CLL 817   LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

MODULE 2  TERMS OF COMTRACT AND
          EXCLUSION CLAUSE

UNIT 1 TERMS OF A CONTRACT

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Main content

        1.3.1 A Term of the Contract
        1.3.2 Express Terms
        1.3.3 Condition
        1.3.4 Warranty
        1.3.5 Representation
        1.3.6 Implied Terms
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction

In the process of negotiating and entering into a contract many things
are said and some of them eventually constitute terms and conditions
usually inserted into the body of the contract documents by the parties
to the contract. Others are regarded as mere representation or
statement with no contractual legal value. The terms and conditions
form the basis of every contract. Some of these terms are usually
express while others are implied from a variety of situations and
circumstances depending on the nature of the contract.

1.2 Learning Outcome

At the end this unit you are expected to be able to discuss what
constitute terms and conditions of a contract, classes of terms of
contract and the major difference between a term of the contract and
a mere representation.

1.3 A Term of the Contract

The major consequence of establishing a contractual relation is the
establishment of rights and obligations of parties. Usually, it is expected
that after the parties have satisfied all the essential requirements of a
valid contract, it will still be necessary to determine the extent of the
obligations which the contract creates. To do this, three things must be
done.

26
CLL 817  MODULE 2

Firstly, it is necessary to determine what the terms are that the parties
have expressly included in the contract. It is important to note that the
rights and obligations of the parties under a contract are determined by
reference to the content of the contract. In other words, the terms of the
contract control the operation of the contract. Secondly, the relative
importance of those terms must be evaluated. Thirdly, it may be
necessary to ascertain some additional terms which a statute, the courts
and custom may imply into the contract.

1.3.1 Distinction between a Term of Contract and a Mere
       Representation

For the purpose of distinguishing a n d i d e n t i f y i n g terms of contract
and a mere representation of three independent tests have been designed.
They are as follows:

1 ) At what stage of the transaction was the crucial statement
        made?

In applying this text, statements made at the preliminary stages of the
negotiations are usually not to be regarded as terms of the contract, but
mere representations. It is assumed that the longer the time lapse
between the time the statement was made, and the time the contract
was concluded, the more likely would it be regarded as a mere
representation and vice versa.

2 ) Reduction of the terms to writing.

The issue here is that where there was an oral agreement, which was
subsequently reduced into writing, any term contained in the oral
agreement, not contained in the later document, will be treated as a
mere representation.

3 ) One party's superior knowledge.

If the person who made the statement had special knowledge or skill as
compared to the other party, then the statement is taken to be a term of
the contract. If, however the statement is made by the person who is
less knowledgeable about the subject matter of the contract. It is
regarded as a mere representation.

1.3.2 Express Terms

If the contract is wholly or partly oral, the task of discovering the terms
which the parties expressly stipulate is a matter of evidence. But where
the contract is wholly in written form, the discovery of the express terms

                                                                                                     27
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

normally presents no problem, because the written terms are the terms of
the contract. In such a case, the court always insists that the parties must
be confined within the four corners of the written words in which they
have chosen to express their agreement.

In determining the content of the contract, there is a cardinal rule of
construction that no one is allowed `to add to, vary or contradict a
written document by parol evidence'. The word `parol' in this context
meaning any extrinsic evidence. This rule is subject to the following
exceptions:

1) Parol evidence may be adduced to prove a custom or trade usage
        whose implications the parties have, or may reasonably be
        deemed to have, tacitly assumed.

2) Parol evidence is adduced to show that the operation of the
        written contract was subject to an agreed antecedent condition - a
        condition precedent which had not occurred.

3) Parol evidence is adduced to prove that the written agreement
        was not the whole contract.

4) Parol evidence may be given to prove some invalidating cause
        outside the written contract itself, e.g. fraud, illegality,
        misrepresentation, mistake, incapacity or absence of
        consideration.

1.3.3 Conditions

The word condition is used in two senses. In the first sense it means a
term or a stipulation in a contract which is absolutely essential to its
existence, the breach of which entitles the injure party to repudiate the
contract and to treat it as discharged. In other words, a condition is a
term of major importance which forms the main basis of the contract,
the breach of which normally gives the aggrieved party a right, at his
option, to repudiate the contract and treat it as at an end.

In the second sense, a condition is a qualification which renders the
operation and consequences of the whole contract dependent upon an
uncertain future event; such conditions are either precedent or
subsequent.

A condition precedent is one which must occur or be fulfilled before an
obligation or right created by the contract can be enforced. In PYM v
Campbell (1910) K.B. 1012 where under a written contract, the
defendant's promise to buy a share in the plaintiff's invention was, by an
unwritten understanding made subject to the approval of a third party. It
was held that, until the approval was given, the defendant was under no
obligation to buy. In other words, the contract was unenforceable in the

28
CLL 817  MODULE 2

absence of the desired approval which was the condition precedent. A
condition subsequent on the other hand is a statement of the
circumstances in which the obligations under a contract may be
prematurely terminated after the transaction has been embarked upon. In
Head v Tattersall (1971)L.R. 7 Exh. 7, the plaintiff bought a horse of a
particular description from the defendant, with the understanding that
the plaintiff could return it, up to the following Wednesday, if it did not
answer the description. The description failed and the plaintiff returned
the horse within the time. It was held that although a contract had come
into existence, the option to return operated as a condition subsequent
and the plaintiff was therefore entitled to cancel the contract and return
the horse.

1.3.4 Warranties

Warranty ordinarily denotes a binding promise, but when it is used in a
narrower and technical sense, it means a subsidiary term in a contract
(i.e a term of minor importance) a breach of which gives no right to
repudiate the contract, but only a right to an action for damages for the
loss sustained. It is described in the Sale of Goods Act, 1893 section62
as:

"An agreement with reference to goods which ...... (is) collateral to
the main purpose of such contract, the breach of which gives rise to
a claim for damages, but not a right to reject the goods, and treat the
contract as repudiated."

The main difference between a condition and a warranty is that a breach
of the former entitles the other party to treat the whole contract as
discharged, while a breach of the latter merely entitles the other party to
claim damages, but does not absolve in from performing his duties
under the contract.

1.3.5 Representation

When a statement is made by the seller of goods to the buyer, relating to
the goods, the statement may be mere representation which helps to
induce the buyer to enter into the contract or a term of the contract i.e a
statement which constitutes part of the contract itself. It is not easy to
distinguish whether a statement is a mere representation or a part of the
contract (See the 3.1 above for the test).

If a statement is held to be only a representation, then if the statement is
false, no damages are obtainable by the buyer at common law unless he
shows that the seller was fraudulent i.e. that the seller knew his
statement was false or made it recklessly not minding whether it was

                                                                                                     29
CLL 817        LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

false or not.

1.3.6 Implied Terms

Generally, apart from express terms i.e. oral or written agreements of
parties, contracts entered into by parties may also be governed by
implied terms. Implied terms are terms implied in the contract, and they,
like express terms may assume the character of conditions or of
warranties. In certain circumstance it may be difficult to ascertain the
intention of the parties without resorting to these implied terms. This is
particularly so when it is remembered that, it is not in every contractual
relationship that the parties will remember to express all the terms which
they intended to govern their contractual arrangement. These implied
terms may be discussed under three major groups namely:

1) Terms Implied by the Courts

Generally, it is not the duty of the court to make a contract for the
parties. However, in very exceptional circumstances, whenever it is
desirable to effectuate the intention of the parties as may be gathered
from their express terms, the court may imply a term into their contract.
But, the circumstances for implying such a term must be established to
be necessary. In Hutton-Mills v Nkansah II and Ors (1940)6
W.A.C.A.32, the court was called upon to imply a term in the written
agreement, that the express powers conferred on the respondents under a
power of attorney to determine certain concessions and dispose of them
also empowered them to collect arrears of rent. The court declined to do
so, as the provisions of the power of attorney were clear, and to imply a
term as urged by the respondents could not be said to be necessary for
the proper functioning of the contract.

2) Terms Implied by Law or Statute.

Contractual terms may also be implied by law or statute. Among
outstanding examples are the implied terms contained in section 4 of the
Hire Purchase Act, 1965 and in section 12-15 of the Sale of Goods Act,
1893. For States in the former Western Region of Nigeria, where the
English Act does not apply, provisions corresponding to section 12-
15 above are contained in sections 13-16 of the Sale of Goods
Law, 1959. These provisions are separately dealt with in the next unit.

3) Terms Implied by Custom and Usage

As a rule, firmly established local mercantile custom and usages may be

30
CLL 817  MODULE 2

implied in a contract, although not expressly provided in the contract by
the parties. Thus, in Hutton v Warren (1836)1 M and W 466, it was
proved that, by a local custom, a tenant was bound to farm according to
a certain course of husbandry and that, on quitting his tenant, he was
entitled to a fair allowance for seed and labour on the arable land. The
court held that, the lease made by the parties must be construed in the
light of this custom.

Also, in Produce Brokers, Co. Ltd v Olympia Oil and Cook Co. Ltd
(1916)1 A.C 314, a written agreement for the sale of goods provided
that "all disputes arising out of this contract shall be referred to
arbitration; a dispute was submitted to arbitrators who in their
award insisted on taking into consideration a particular custom of the
trade. The House of Lords held that they were right to do so.

It should however be noted that the application of any customary
implied terms is subject to the rule that such terms cannot override the
terms of a written contract.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 7

1) Examine the three tests adopted over the years in distinguishing a
         term of a contract from a mere representation.

2) Define an express term of a contract
3) Distinguish between conditions and warranties.
4) Discuss the various heads under which an implied term could be

         invoked.

1.4 Summary

The pivotal role played by the knowledge of the distinction between a
term of a contract and a mere representation; the importance of express
terms in the nature of conditions and warranties and the necessity of
implied terms in the absence of specific terms on a variety of subjects
makes this unit a vital one in the knowledge of the basic ingredients of
contract relating to commercial transactions. The concept of terms of a
contract as shown above usually forms the bedrock on which a valid
contract is built. Apart from the basic requirements of an offer,
acceptance, consideration and intention to create legal relations,
where the parties are silent on the terms intended to govern the contract
at hand, there is likely to be a breach of the contract by either of the
parties thereto. Therefore, the terms of a contract, particularly in relation
to commercial transaction are very important.

                                                                                                     31
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

.

1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

Kingsley Igweike "Nigeria Commercial Law: Agency." (1993) FAB
        Educational Books, Jos, Nigeria.

Sagay; "Nigeria Law of Contract." Ibadan (1999).

M.C. Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, 1992.

J. A. M. Agbonika and J. A. A. Agbonika, Sale of Goods (Commercial
        Law), 2009, Ababa Press Ltd

C.J. Okoro (2013), Business Law for Professional Exams, MaltHouse
        Press Ltd

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1) The three tests adopted over the years in distinguishing a

       term of a contract from a mere representation are.

                   i . At what stage of the transaction was the
                       crucial statement made?

                 i i . Reduction of the terms to writing.
                i i i . One party's superior knowledge.
2) Express terms of a contract are terms specifically agreed on by
        the contracting parties.
3) The distinction between conditions and warranties is that a breach
        of condition is a fundamental breach that can leads to repudiation
        of the contract while a breach of warranties gives a right to
        damages.
4) The various heads under which an implied term could be invoked
        are: i) custom, ii) trade usage and iii) law and statute.

32
CLL 817                                       MODULE 2

UNIT 2 TERMS IMPLIED BY STATUTE

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Terms Implied by Statute

        2.3.1 Time
        2.3.2 Title
        2.3.3 Description
        2.3.3 Fitness for Particular Purpose
        2.3.4 Merchantable Quality
        2.3.5 Sale by Sample
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

2.1 Introduction

Certain terms are implied by statute, the Sale of Good Act into the
contract of sale of goods whether or not the parties make reference to
such terms in the contract. Such terms relates to relevance of time of
payment, right to sell, quiet possession, freedom from encumbrance,
fitness for purpose, quality of good and compliance with sample. These
terms are provided in section 10 to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act.

2.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit you will be able to discuss the terms implied into
contract of sale of goods by statutes.

2.3 Terms Implied by Statute

The statutory provisions on implied terms are provided in sections 10 to
15 0f the Sale of Goods Act. These terms are examined below.

2.3.1 Time

Generally, time of payment is not of essence in a contract of sale of
goods. If parties wish to make time an important part of the contract
they must state it. Section 10 of the Sale of Goods Act provides that
unless a different intention appears from the term of contract,
stipulation as to time of payment are not deemed to be of essence of the
a contract of sale of goods. Though time of payment is not of the
essence of the contract, time is of essence in other aspect of
performance such as delivery, shipment, or opening of letter of credit.
In Amadi v. Thomas Aplin and Co, the court held that failure of the

                                                                                                     33
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

ship to arrive as agreed was a breach of condition as to time.

2.3.2 Title

Section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act deals generally with implied
condition as to title. The first part deals with condition as to title, the
second and the third deal with warranty relating to quiet possession and
freedom from encumbrances.

2.3.3 Right To Sell

Section 12(1) provides that there is an implied condition on the parr of
the seller that in the case of sale that he has the right to sell and in the
case of agreement to sell, that he will have the right to sell at the time
property is to pass. A person to whom property has not pass would not
have a right to sell. Rowland v. Dival(1923) 2KB 500, Akosile v.
Ogidan, and Neblet v. Confectioners Materials Co (1921)3 K.B 545

2.3.4 Quiet Possession

Section 12(2) provides an implied warranty that the buyer shall have
and enjoy quiet possession of the goods. See Niblett v. Confectioners
Material Co (supra)

2.3.5 Freedom from Encumbrance

Section 12(3) provides an implied warranty that the goods shall be free
from any charge or encumbrance in favour of any third party, not
declared or known to the buyer before or at the time when the contract
is made. See Lloyds v. Scottish Ltd Modern Cars & Caravans
(1966)1QB, 764

2.3.6 Description

Section 13 provides that where goods are sold by description, there an
implied condition that the goods shall correspond with the description,
and if the sale is by sample, as well as, by description, it is not
sufficient that the bulk of the goods correspond with the sample if the
goods do not correspond with the description. Description are words
used to indicate or refer to the quality, quantity or attribute of the
goods. See Re Moore and Co Ltd v. Landauer and Co.(2 KSB 519),
Varley v. Whipps (19000 1 Q.B 513. The buyer's remedy for breach
of this condition is either to claim damages or to reject the goods. The
right of rejection is exerceable even when the goods are merchantable.

This is mostly applicable where the buyer has not seen the goods

34
CLL 817  MODULE 2

offered to him and would only on the description of the goods as was in
the case of Varley v. Whipps. On the other hand it applies where the
buyer has seen the goods but relies on the seller's assessment of the
goods. See Grant v. Australia Knitting Mills Ltd (1936) AC 85 and
Reardon smith Line Ltd v. Ynguar Hansen-Tangen (1976)1 WLR
989.

This section 13 also applies to the mode of packing of the goods as was
in Re Moore and Co Ltd v. Landauer and Co.

2.3.7 Fitness for Particular Purpose

Section 14 provides that there no implied warranty or condition as to
the quality or fitness for a particular purpose of goods supplied under a
contract of sale, except as follows, where the buyer expressly or by
implication makes known to the seller the particular purpose for which
the goods are required, so as to show that the buyer relies on the seller's
skill or judgement, and the goods are of a description which is in the
course of the seller's business to supply. The requirements for the
application of this condition are:

1) The buyer must make known (expressly or by implication) to the
        seller, the particular purpose for which he wants the goods. See
        Khalil and Dibbo v. Mastrionikolis (1948) 12 WACA 462.
        Where the goods are used for only one purpose, it will be
        deemed to have been impliedly made known to the seller. See
        Priest v.Last(1949) 12 WACA 462 where a hot water bottle
        which burst while in use was held to be unfit for the particular
        purpose for which it was bought. See Osemobor v. Niger
        Biscuit Co Ltd (1973)2 NCLR, 382

2) The buyer must have relied on the seller's skill and judgement
        See Grant v. Australia Knitting Mills (supra) contrast with
        Ijomo v. Mid Motors Nigeria Ltd (Igweike Page 50)

2.3.8 Merchantable Quality

Section 14(2) provides that where goods are bought by description from
a seller who deals in goods of that description, there is an implied
condition that the goods shall be of merchantable quality, provided that
if the buyer has examined the goods, there shall be no implied condition
as regards defects which such examination ought to have revealed. The
conditions to be fulfilled for this section to be applicable are:

         35
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

1) The purchase must have been by description, and this include a
        sale under trade name

2) The goods must be such that the seller deals in
3) Where the buyer examines the goods, his rights under section

        14(2) are destroyed as regards defect which such examination
        ought to have revealed. Where the is opportunity for the buyer to
        examine , he will be deemed to have examined

Goods are unmerchantable where they are not fit for purpose for which
the goods would normally be used. See Plastic Manufacturing Co Ltd
v. Toki of Nigeria Ltd(1976) 12 CCHCJ/2701

2.3.9 Sale by Sample

Section 15(2) provides that where there is a sale by sample, there is an
implied condition that: the bulk shall correspond with the sample in
quality. The buyer shall have a reasonable opportunity of comparing the
bulk with the sample. The goods shall be free from any defect rendering
them unmerchantable which will not be apparent on reasonable
examination of the sample

               SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 8

        Critically analyse the terms implied by statute in
        contract of sale of goods.

2.4 Summary

At the end of this unit, you have been introduced to the key terms
associated with the Sale of Goods Act as contained in section 10 to 15.
The place of time in contract of sale of goods, implied conditions and
warranties and effect of examination by buyer in a sale by description
and sample. Certain terms are implied by the statute notwithstanding
whether or not the parties make reference to it in their contract. The
implication is that such term will apply to all contracts of sale of goods
whether or not parties remember to mention it in their contract. This
makes it almost impossible for sellers to knowingly defraud an innocent
purchaser.

36
CLL 817                                                 MODULE 2

2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London, (2007)

Igweike, Nigerian Commercial Law, Sale of Goods, Malthouse Law
        Books, (second edition) 2001

M.C. Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, 1992.

J. A. M. Agbonika and J. A. A. Agbonika, Sale of Goods (Commercial
        Law), 2009, Ababa Press Ltd

C.J. Okoro (2013), Business Law for Professional Exams, MaltHouse
        Press Ltd

2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The answer will cover the implied term as contain in sections section 10
        to 15 of the Sale of Goods Act.

                                                                    37
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 3 EXCLUSION CLAUSES, FUNDAMENTAL
               TERMS AND FUNDAMENTAL BREACH

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Exclusion Clauses, Fundamental Terms and Fundamental

        Breach
        3.3.1 Exemption Clauses
        3.3.2 The Concept of Fundamental Terms
        3.3.3 Fundamental Breach
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction

Apart from the terms usually inserted into a contract by the
parties thereto, parties are also, free to limit or exclude the
obligations otherwise attached to such undertaking. It is the importance
and the significance of inserting exclusion or exemption clauses and
Limiting terms that is our concern in this unit

3.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit, you should b e a b l e t o i d e n t i f y a n d
discuss exclusion clause, fundamental terms and
fundamental breach

3.3 Exclusion Clauses, Fundamental Terms and
       Fundamental Breach

The three concepts, exclusion clauses, fundamental terms and
fundamental breach, are examined below.

3.3.1 Exemption Clauses

An exemption clause or exclusion clause is a term in a contract
which seeks to exempt one of the parties from liabilities in certain
events. Where the term merely limits (rather than wholly excludes)
liability, it is called a limiting clause. However, the governing
principles are the same in both cases. The courts have, over the years,
made appreciable success in controlling unreasonable exemption
clauses, and have fully developed principles which govern their
validity.

38
CLL 817  MODULE 2

3.3.2 The Concept of Fundamental Terms

The courts have in recent years developed the concept of
"fundamental term" which insists that the operation of an exemption or
limiting clause will be subject to the doctrine of fundamental terms.
Under this doctrine, no person is allowed to take shelter under the
provisions of an exemption clause, notwithstanding how wide the
clause is expressed, if the breach of the contract is substantial and
affects the very purpose of the contract. In every contract, there is
some central obligation, the non-fulfillment of which renders the
contract meaningless. See Karoles (Harrow) Ltd V Wllis (1956)2
ALL E.R. 866.

3.3.3 Fundamental Breach

A fundamental breach has been described by UpJohn, L.J. in
Charter House Credit Co. Ltd. V Tolly (Supra) as:

"No more than a covenant shorthand expression of saying that a
particular breach or breach of contract by one party is or are such
as to go to the root of the contract which entitles the other party to
treat such breach or breaches as a repudiation of the whole contract".

A fundamental breach does not mean that the fundamental obligation
has been broken, but that the breach or breaches which have
occurred together strike at the root of the contract. Thus, Charter
House Credit Co. Ltd. V Tolly (Supra) although the vehicle delivered
was defective; it was still a car within the terms of the agreement.
Therefore, there had not been a breach of a fundamental term.
However, the principal defect was so serious that it constitutes a
fundamental breach of the contract.

The new governing principle, of exemption clauses in relation to
fundamental term, as laid down by the House of Lords in the cases
of Suisse Atlantique Case (1967)1 A.C 361 and Photo Productions
Ltd V Securicor Transport Ltd (1980)1 ALL E.R. 596 .

  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 9

   Effects of fundamental breach on exemption clause:

   The position in Nigeria and UK

         39
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

3.4 Summary

Exemption clauses, the concept of fundamental term and fundamental
breach are principally interwoven to the extent that there is no way a
discussion on one will not necessarily affect the other. This, therefore,
is what the learner should look out for. Exclusion clause, limitation
terms fundamental terms and fundamental breach are all technical
terms used in the creation of a contract in commercial transactions. A
proper understanding of this term will be of immense advantage to the
learners.

3.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

Kingsley Igweike (1993). "Nigeria Commercial Law: Agency." Jos,
        Nigeria: FAB Educational Books

Friedman, G.H.L. (1984). Law of Agency, 7th Edition.
        London: Butterworths.

Sagay; (1991). "Nigeria Law of Contract." Ibadan.

3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The effect is that exemption clause is inapplicable where there is a

fundamental breach. This is the position in Nigeria and UK. Student should
provide cases in Nigeria and UK.

40
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

MODULE 3 PASSING OF PROPERTY

UNIT 1 THE CONCEPT OF PROPERTY

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 The Concept of Property

        1.3.1 Transfer of Property to the Buyer
        1.3.2 Property and Possession
1.4 Summary
1.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction

Contract of sale of goods, as we have seen, reflects the transfer or
agreement to transfer the property in goods from the seller to the buyer.
The meaning and characteristic of "property" will be explained in this
unit

1.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this Unit, you should be able to distinguish between the
possessory title and status of a seller.

1.3 Concept of Property

In a contract of sale, the seller agrees to transfer his interest in the goods.
The seller in most cases who was in possession would transfer a
possessory title, and the fact of the possession would be strong evidence
of ownership. The concept of transfer means to transfer "dominion" i.e.
the highest possible rights enjoyed by the owner of goods to the buyer.
Under Section 62(1) of the Sale of Goods Act, "Property" means general
property in the goods and not merely a special property.

1.3.1 Transfer of Property to the Buyer

Part II of the Act, which covers Section 16-20 is titled `Transfer of
Property between Seller and Buyer', whilst the remaining provisions
under Part II, are collectively titled "Transfer of Title".

Under Section 62(1), the term "Property" is defined as the "General
Property" in goods as opposed to mere "Special property", ordinarily
and legally, the term "general property" conveys the meaning of
"dominion", "title" or "ownership".

         41
CLL 817  MODULE 3

According to Craig, Sale of Goods, (1974, p.17), that there was a
deliberate effort to differentiate between circumstances where there is a
transfer of property between the seller and the buyer from a transfer
between a third party who may style himself a "seller" and a buyer. The
type of transfer that takes place between the questionable "Seller" and
the buyer is called "Transfer of Title" therefore, under the second
heading "Transfer of title" deals with circumstances in which a buyer
takes a good title even though the seller was not the owner and was not
entitled to sell the goods in question. That is to say, the "Seller" may
take a transfer of title as against the true seller who can transfer property
in the goods.

1.3.2 Property and Possessions

"Property" in goods means the ownership of or the title to the goods.
Possession, on the other hand, is as a rule, the physical control or
custody of goods. Transfer of property in goods is not dependent on the
transfer of possession of the goods.

 SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 10

 Discuss the concept of ownership and possession in sale of goods law.

1.4 Summary

This unit has revealed the underlying facts of the concept of property in
sale of goods and the interest of the seller after transfer of goods. It also
discusses the fact that the "Property" in goods means the ownership of
or the title to the goods while "Possession", means physical control in
goods. It is possible, as illustrated earlier, for the possession of certain
goods to vest in one person, whilst the ownership vests in another.

1.5 References/Further Reading

Hire Purchase Act. Cap 169, Laws of the Federation, 1990
        Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Rawlings (2007) Commercial Law, University of London Press
        Okany, Nigeria Commercial Law, Africana-Fep Publisher,
        Limited, 1992.

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

Ownership connotes transfer of property in the goods while possession being
 in custody and physical control of the goods.

42
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 2 PASSING OF PROPERTY IN SPECIFIC GOODS

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Passing of Property in Specific Goods

        2.3.1 Rule 1 on Passing of Property in Unconditional Sale of
                Specific Goods

2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Readings.

2.1 Introduction

It is important in all contracts of sale of goods to know the nature of
goods that form the subject matter of sales, i.e. are they specific or
unascertained? The essence is to determine the time the property in
goods passes to the buyer and this will help determine where the liability
lies. Section 62(1) of the Act refers to "specific goods" as "goods
identified and agreed upon at the time a contract of sale is made".

Ordinarily, property of ascertained goods ought to pass when a contract
of sale is made. However, such passing is subject to the overriding
provision laid down by Section 17(1) that "the property is transferred to
the buyer at such time as the parties to the contract intend it to be
transferred". In a contract for sale of specific or ascertained goods, the
property in the goods passes from the seller to the buyer at such time (if
any) as the parties, expressly, or impliedly, stipulate in the contract of
sale. In order to ascertain the intention of the parties, regard shall be
made to the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the
circumstances of the case.

In practice, the parties do not usually express their intention as to the
time property passes. Therefore, where the parties fail to stipulate the
time at which the property is to pass, then resort must be made to certain
ruler laid down by the Act for ascertaining the time at which the
property passes (section 17(2) and 18(1) of the Act.

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 explain the meaning of passing of property in specific
        (ascertained) goods.

 understand how the property in specific goods passes at the time
        a contract is made.

 explain why the passing of property in specific goods is subject to
        the overriding provision laid down by Section 17(1) of the Act.

                                                                                                     43
CLL 817  MODULE 3

 explain the role of the terms of contract, the conduct, of the
        parties, and circumstances of the case, in ascertaining the
        intention of the parties.

2.3 Passing of Property in Specific Goods

2.3.1 Rule I On Passing of Property in Unconditional Sale of
       Specific Goods

Unless a different intention appears, there are rules for ascertaining the
intention of the parties as to the time of which the property in the goods
is to pass to the buyer. The first of the rules came out in R. V. Ward Ltd
(1967)1 G.B. 534. In that case, Diplock L. J. suggested as follows;

"In modern times very little is needed to give rise to the inference that
the property in specific goods is to pass only in delivery or payment."

The above dictum of his Lordship shows clearly that the parties can
expressly exclude the operation of Section 18, if they so wish. Section
18, provides that "unless a different intention appears, the following are
rules for ascertaining the intention of the parties as to the time at which
the property in the goods is to pass to the buyer."

Rule 1 of the section 18 provides that "where there is an unconditional
contract for the sale of specific goods, in a deliverable state, the property
in the goods passes to the buyer when the contract is made, and it is
immaterial whether the time of payment or the time of delivery, or both,
be postponed."

Rule 1 of Section 18 gives rise to a number of questions with regard to
the meaning of the following terms and phrase.

1) Unconditional Contract

This may mean a contract which does not contain a condition precedent
or condition subsequent that may have the effect of suspending
performance of the contract or passing of the property.

It may also mean a contract not containing any conditions in the sense of
essential stipulations the breach of which gives the buyer the rights to
treat the contract as repudiated. In other words, an unconditional
contract is one which is not subject to a condition precedent or
subsequent. Section 1(2) lays down that " a contract of sale may be
"absolute" or "conditional" which clearly means subject to a condition
precedent, for otherwise there would be no point in the contract. It
should be observed that Rules 2, 3, and 4 of Section 18 deal with

44
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

contracts subject to a condition precedent. By Rule 1, contracts, deals
with contracts not subject to such conditions.

In Ollett V Jordan, the meaning of "unconditionally appropriated"
within Rule 51 was examined. It was held that, the property in goods did
not pass to the buyer owing to the fact that there was no condition
precedent.

It is submitted that, for a sale of goods contract to be enforceable, it
must be without conditions. In England, these difficulties appear to have
been taken care of by the provision of Section 4 of the Misrepresentation
Act, 1967, which provides that, "where the contract is for specific
goods, the property passes to the buyer. In the light of this, it may not be
necessary to give an unnatural construction to the words "unconditional
contract" in Section 18 Rule 1, in order to avoid depriving a buyer of his
right to reject goods. It is noteworthy that this is a foreign authority and
may only be helpful in the interpretation of the term "unconditional
contract".

2) Specific Goods

The second major phrase (also a requirement) under Rule 1 is that the
goods must be specific for the property to pass. The question that arises
under Rule 1 is as to the meaning of the phrase "specific goods". Section
62 defines "specific goods" as goods identified and agreed upon at the
time a contract of sale is made".

As far as passing of goods is concerned, it is settled that future goods
can never be specific, although future goods, if truly identified may be
specific goods, and its destruction may frustrate the contract.

In Varlet V Whipp (1990) 1 Q. B. 513, even though the goods were
specific, they were held to be "future good" as the seller was not the
owner of them as at the time of the contract.

The courts have been strict in interpreting the word "specific" under
Rule 1. For instance in, in Kursell V Timber Operators and Contractors
Ltd (1972) 1 K. B. 298, the plaintiff sold to the defendants all the trees
in Latvian forest of certain measurement, on a particular date for
225,500 and the defendant were given 15 years within which to remove
the timber. Soon afterwards, the Latvian Assembly passed a law
confiscating the forest. The question that arose was whether the sale was
that of specific goods within rule 1 as the pass property in them or not.

The Court of Appeal held that the property in the trees had not passed to
the defendant as the tress of the specified dimensions were not

                                                                                                     45
CLL 817  MODULE 3

sufficiently identified, because not all the tress in the forest were to pass
but only those conforming to the stipulated measurements.

3) Deliverable State

By the provision of Section 18 Rule 1 another requirement is that the
goods must be in deliverable state. The means that the goods must be in
a deliverable state in order to enable property to pass. Section 62(4)
provides the meaning of this term. It states that;

"Goods are in a "deliverable state" within the meaning of this Act when
they are in such a state that the buyer would under the contract be
bound to take delivery of them"

The above provision is not all that clear, for it does not give a
comprehensive definition of the term "deliverable state". It also does not
say that, if the buyer would not be bound to take delivery of the goods,
then the goods are not in a deliverable state.

The buyer is not bound to take delivery if the goods are defective goods
but it does not follow that all defective goods are not in a deliverable
state within the meaning of the above provision. Where this type of
situation arises, property would never pass in defective goods.

Generally, "defective" does not prevent goods from passing because if
the buyer rejects the goods, the property reverts to the seller.

Section 62(4) is probably intended to cover the case where the goods
could not be said to be in a deliverable state physically yet the buyer had
agreed to take delivery. In other words, the expression "deliverable
state" cannot be said by reference to mean delivery as in Section 62(4)
as a voluntary physical transfer of possession".

The possession of goods can always be transferred in law, if the parties
intend to transfer it, no matter what the physical condition of goods may
be. Thus, if this is what "deliverable state" meant, goods would probably
always be in a deliverable state.

There appears to be a difficulty in getting a clear definition of the term
"deliverable state". It does not appear that there is any known local
authority on this matter but there are foreign authorities. In Kursell V
Timber Operator (supra), the court of Appeal decided that not only was
the timber not specific but could also not be regarded as being in a
"deliverable state". The question now is what constitutes goods in a
"deliverable state". Again, in Underwood Ltd V Burgh Castle Brick
and Cement Syndicate (1921) All ER 575, the plaintiffs' sellers agreed

46
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

to sell a condensing machine to the defendants. The machine weighed
30tons and was bolted to and embedded in a cement floor. Under the
term of contract, the plaintiffs were to dismantle the machine, a task
which cost them 100 and took about 2 weeks. While the engine was
being bided on a railway truck, it was damaged. The plaintiffs would
only be entitled to sue for the price if the property had already passed
before the time of damage.

It was held inter alia that the machine was not in a deliverable state. For
this reason property had not passed when the contract was made. Atkins,
L. J., stated that in view of the risk and expenses involved in dismantling
and moving the engine, the proper inference to be drawn was that
property was not to pass until the engine was safely placed on the rail in
London.

   SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 11

   1. Umar sold a car to Yinus which they were required to use for his

            graduation. The car was delivered to the Yinus' premises but was

            stolen before it could be tested. At what point does the property in the

            car pass.

2.4 Summary

In this unit, the learner, has been able understand the following passing
of property in specific (ascertained) Goods; meaning of Rule 1 of
Section 18; the issues regarding the meaning of; unconditional
Contract; specific Goods; and deliverable State. The phrase
"unconditional contract" appears nebulous within the purview of Section
18 Rule. The general view is that it is a contract that does not contain a
condition precedent or condition subsequent that have effect of
suspending performance of the contract or the passing of property.

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Hire Purchase Act. Cap 169, Laws of the Federation.
        Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London Press, 2007.
        Okany Nigeria Commercial Law, Africana-Fep Publisher,
        Limited, 1992

                                                                                                     47
CLL 817                                 MODULE 3

2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1. Rule 1 of the section 18 provides that "where there is an
unconditional contract for the sale of specific goods, in a deliverable
state, the property in the goods passes to the buyer when the contract is
made, and it is immaterial whether the time of payment or the time of
delivery, or both, be postponed."

48
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 3 RULES ON PASSING OF PROPERTY IN
               CONDITIONAL SALE OF SPECIFIC GOODS

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Rules on Passing of Property in Conditional Sale of Specific

        Goods
        3.3.1 Rule 2
        3.3.2 Rule 3
        3.3.3 Rule 4
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Readings
3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction

The application of the rules in Section 18 depends upon the existence of
the intention of the parties. This is usually discernible from evidence.
According to Rule 1, the fact that the time of delivery or the time for the
payment of the price is postponed does not prevent the property from
passing when the contract is made.

In an ordinary sale in a shop, property does not pass until the parties
have agreed in the mode of payment. And in big departmental shops,
where the buyer usually goes round the shop to collect items he wishes
to buy, property does not pass until the price is paid. It should be noted
that Rule 1 does not take the time of payment as crucial since it may be
postponed.

Another factor that may point to a contrary intention is the existence of a
specific agreement on the transfer of risk. Generally, risk in goods
passes with the property, so that where the risk has passed, it will be that
the property also passed. Conversely, where the risk remains with the
seller, the property has not passed.

3.2 Learning Outcome

By the end of this unit, you should be able to explain how Rules 2, 3,
and 4 deal with conditional sale of specific goods in contradistinction to
Rule 1 which deals with unconditional contracts of sale of goods.

         49
CLL 817  MODULE 3

3.3 Rules on Passing of Property in Conditional Sale of
       Specific Goods

3.3.1 Rule 2

Rule 2 provides as follows:

"Where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods and the seller is
bound to do something to the goods, for the purpose of putting them into
a deliverable state, the property does not pass until such things be done,
and the buyer has notice thereof."

For the principle under Rule 2 to apply, reference must be drawn from
the terms of the contract and the circumstances of the case.

It is only when it is for the seller to put the goods in a deliverable state
that the Act draws that inference. For example, if Inyang sells a house to
Bitrus and agrees to replace the roof with a new one, property will not
pass until Bitrus has notice that this has been done.

It is presumable that the rule is also applicable where the buyer has to do
something to the goods, although Rule 2, refers to the seller only.

The fact that goods must be repaired or altered before delivery is more
likely to lead a court to conclude that the property is not to pass until
delivery. This rule is basically applied to "goods not in deliverable
state".

3.3.2 Rule 3

Rule 3 provides as follows:

"Where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliverable
state, but the seller is bound to weigh, measure, or do some other act or
thing with reference to the goods for the purpose of ascertaining the
price, the property does not pass until such act or thing be done and the
buyer has notice thereof."

The Rule is explicit in that it makes it clear that where the passing of the
property is conditional upon the performance of some act with reference
to the goods property does not pass until the buyer has notice of the
fulfillment of that condition. Examples of this include weighing, testing
etc.

Thus, for instance, an agreement to sell a fairly used Peugeot car at a
price entire sack of cocoa at so much per ton does not pass the

50
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

ownership of the car to the buyer until the seller has tested the car and
the buyer has been informed.

Under Rule 3, goods do not acquire the character of being in a
deliverable state until the seller has done all that he was supposed to do,
including measuring or testing them.

If the seller of specific goods in a deliverable state is required to carry
out some procedure to ascertain the price, such as weighing testing or
measuring, property will not pass until that has been done and the buyer
notified.

It therefore follows that if the contract demands that someone other than
the seller is to undertake this task, Rule 3 will not apply if it is the buyer
or the third party and not the seller who has to do something to the
goods as in the case of Turley V Bates (1863)2 H and C. 200.

3.3.3 Rule 4

When goods are delivered to the buyer on approval or "on sale or
return" or other similar terms the property therein passes to the buyer:
--
(a) When he signifies his approval or acceptance to the seller or does

        any other act adopting the transaction:
(b) If he does not signify his approval or acceptance to the seller but

        retains the goods without giving notice of rejection, then, if a time
        has been fixed for the return of the goods, on the expiration of
        such time, and, if no time has been fixed, on the expiration of a
        reasonable time, What is a reasonable time is a question of fact.

The above rule deals with different types of transactions altogether,
although similar to a conditional sale and may become a sale in course
of time.

The two arms of Rule 4 shall be discussed.

1) Signifying his approval or adopting the transaction.

Under this Rule property will pass to a buyer who takes property on sale
or return, if he signifies his acceptance to the seller or does any act
which shows that he adopts the transaction, or keeps the goods for
longer time than the period agreed for their return, or for an
unreasonable length of time.

                                                                                                     51
CLL 817  MODULE 3

Where the prospective buyer informs the seller that he wishes to buy,
this is enough to allow the property to pass.

Similarly, where the buyer does an act in relation to the goods which is
consistent only with having become owner of them, for example,
pledges or resells the goods, this is an act adopting the transaction
within the meaning of Rule 4.

The case of Kirkham v Attend borough (1897)1 Q. B. 201 is an example
of "an act adopting the transaction". There, the plaintiff, allowed W to
have jewelry on sale or return and W pawned the jewelry with A, the
defendant. The plaintiff brought an action to recover the jewelry from
the defendant. It was held that, the action must fail as W's act of
pawning the jewelry was "an act of adopting, and therefore, the property
in the jewelry passed to him, so that K could not recover it from A.

In this context, it should be noted that it is immaterial that the buyer
obtained the goods by fraud.

2) Elements or Ingredients of Rule 4(B)

(a) Retention of goods where time is specified:

If a time has been fixed for the return of the goods, the buyer is deemed
to have exercised his option to buy if he returns them after this time.
Hence, the transaction may be completed without expression of
acceptance.

(b) Retention of goods where no time is specified:

Retention of goods "beyond a reasonable time" may arise where no time
is specified in the arrangement between the parties. If the buyer retains
the property without giving a time of their rejection, property will pass
to him.

(c) Rejection of the goods:

Property will pass under Rule 4(B), if the buyer does not give notice of
rejection within either the stipulated time or within a reasonable time, if
time is stipulated. Though there is no duty on the buyer to return the
goods in order to prevent the goods from passing. The buyer may
therefore be liable for detinue if he holds unto the goods after notice of
rejection.

(d) Evidence of contrary intention:

52
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

The operation of Rule 4 of Section 18 is subject to there being no
evidence of a contrary intention. It is clear that the court have allowed
the seller some form of freedom. In Weiner V Gill (1906)2 KB 574, the
plaintiff delivered jewellery to Y, on the terms of a memorandum which
stated that "on appropriation, on sale for cash only or return ... goods
will be on probation or on sale or return remain the property of Weiner
.... until such goods are settled or charged" Y thought X had a potential
buyer and he handed the goods to X who pledged them with the
defendant. It was held that, the plaintiff brought this action to recover
them from him. That is to say, X (or even Y's) act of pledging the goods
which would have amounted to an act adopting the transaction was
expressly excluded by the memorandum.

                       SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
(a) Tunde expresses an interest to buy a particular car owned by Joke for N1

    million provided it will be suitable for his nephew to use in Lagos traffic.
    Joke agrees that Tunde can take the car for 10 days in order to determine its
    suitability. After a week the car breaks down. Is Tunde liable for the price?
(b) Would your answer be different if Tunde had used the car himself on a
    number of occasions and had travelled a long distance with it.

3.4 Summary

This unit has revealed the main intents of Rules 2, 3 and 4, of Section 18
that they deal with conditional sale of specific goods and that the Rules
input in them certain factors negating the application of Rule 1 of
Section 18 which deals basically with unconditional sale of specific
goods. Rule 2 of Section 18 deals with goods not in deliverable state,
whilst Rule 3 of Section 18 deals with what the seller of specific goods
in a deliverable state is required to carry out. Rule 4 of Section 18 deals
with where goods are "delivered to the buyer on approval or sale or
return", in this instance, property passes when the buyer signifies
acceptance or does an act adopting the transaction or retains the goods
beyond the time fixed by the agreement for a decision without giving
notice of rejection, or if no time sis fixed, retains the goods beyond a
reasonable time (rule 4(b).

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Hire Purchase Act. Cap 169, Laws of the Federation.
        Sale of Goods Act, 1893.

                                                                                                     53
CLL 817                                                   MODULE 3

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University of London Press, 2007.

Okany Nigeria Commercial Law, Africana-Fep Publisher, Limited,
        1992.

3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1. Rule 3 provides as follows:

"Where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods in a deliverable
state, but the seller is bound to weigh, measure, or do some other act or
thing with reference to the goods for the purpose of ascertaining the
price, the property does not pass until such act or thing be done and the
buyer has notice thereof."

The Rule is explicit in that it makes it clear that where the passing of the
property is conditional upon the performance of some act with reference
to the goods property does not pass until the buyer has notice of the
fulfillment of that condition. Examples of this include weighing, testing
etc.

2. Yes, because that was the agreed condition precedent.

54
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 4 PASSING OF PROPERTY IN
               UNASCERTAINED OR FUTURE GOODS

4.1 Introduction.
4.2 Learning Outcome.
4.3 Passing of Property in Unascertained or Future Goods

        4.3.1 Property cannot pass until goods are ascertained
        4.3.2 Passing of property is dependent upon the intention of the

                parties
        4.3.3 How are goods ascertained?
        4.3.4 When does property pass?
        4.3.5 Delivery to a carrier
4.4 Summary
4.5 References/Further Readings.

4.1 Introduction

The Act does not in any way define the word "unascertained goods", but
the term will be looked at in three different areas and they are:

1) Goods to be in manufactured or grown by the seller: these are
        necessarily future goods and are define in section 5 (1) of the Act
        as goods to be manufactured or acquired by the seller after
        making the contract of sale. In Howell v. Coupland (1876) 1 Q.B.
        258, the court held that a sale of 200 tons of potatoes to be grown
        on a particular piece of land was a contract of sale of future
        goods.

2) Purely generic goods: these are goods sold by description, but
        which are not identified or agreed upon at the time of the contract
        but are included in a particular class of goods. For example where
        the seller promises to deliver 100 Abuja Yam tubers, if the seller
        does not have enough yam tubers of the description under
        reference to appropriate to the contract, it must necessarily be a
        case of future goods.

3) An unidentified portion of a specified whole: where the seller has
        enough quantity to appropriate to the contract, the goods may be
        categorised as an unidentified portion of a specified whole. For
        example, a party may assert "20 cartons out of 30 cartons of beer
        now in my store".

The essence of sale of goods is the transfer of ownership or title in a
property from the buyer to the seller. Section 16 provides that no
property in good is transferred from the seller to the buyer except the
goods are ascertained.
Rule 5--

                                                                                                     55
CLL 817  MODULE 3

(a) Where there is a contract for the sale of unascertained or future
        goods by description, and goods of that description and in a
        deliverable state are unconditionally appropriated to the
        contract, either by the seller with the assent of the buyer, or by
        the buyer with the assent of the seller, the property in the goods
        thereupon passes to the buyer. Such assent may be express or
        implied, and may be given either before or after the
        appropriation is made.

(b) Where, in pursuance of the contract, the seller delivers the goods
        to the buyer or to a carrier or other bailee or custodier (whether
        named by the buyer or not) for the purpose of transmission to the
        buyer, and does not reserve the right of disposal, he is deemed to
        have unconditionally appropriated the goods to the contract.

By the provision of Section 18 Rule 5, no matter what the parties may
wish, property does not pass until the goods are ascertained.

Once the goods are ascertained, property passes when the parties intend,
if no such intention can be determined where the following conditions
apply:

1) Where there is a contract for the sale of unascertained goods or
        future goods by description.

2) Where goods of that description and in deliverable state are
        unconditionally appropriated to the contract.

3) Where there is an irrevocable identification of the goods that are
        the subject of the contract.

4) Where the assent of both parties.

4.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of the Unit you should be able to explain the concept of
passing off "unascertained" or "future goods".

4.3 Passing of Property in Unascertained or Future Goods

4.3.1 Property Cannot Pass Until Goods Are Ascertained

The fundamental rule in Section 16 of the Act is that
"where there is a contract for the sale of unascertained goods, no
property in the goods is transferred to the buyer unless and until the
goods are ascertained."

The word "ascertained" was defined by Atkin, LJ in Re Wait (1927) 1
Ch 606, as "goods identified in accordance with the agreement after the
time a contract of sale is made".

56
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

An analytical illustration of Section 16 of the Act came up in the case of
Healey v. Howlett and Sons (1917) 1 KB 337, where the plaintiff, a fish
exporter carrying on business in Ireland, dispatched 190 boxes of
mackerel by rail and ship to his customers in England and instructed the
railway officials to earmark twenty boxes for the defendant and the
remaining boxes to two other consignees. The train was delayed before
the defendant's boxes were earmarked and by the time this was done the
fish had deteriorated.

The court held that the defendant was not liable because the property in
the fish had not passed to the defendant before the boxes were
earmarked and they were therefore still at the sellers risk when they
deteriorated. See also in a Re Goldcorp Exchange Ltd (1994) 3
W.L.R.199.

4.3.2 Passing of Property is Dependent upon the Intention of
       the Parties

Property in unascertained goods can only pass when the goods become
ascertained. It is worthy of note that whether the property in the goods
will pass at the particular point in time depends on the intention of the
parties as provided for in Section 17 of the Act.

Section 17 (2) states that:

"for the purpose of ascertaining the intention of the parties, regard shall
be had to the terms of the contract, the conduct of the parties and the
circumstances of the case".

In the case of Mountbatten Investments (Pty) Ltd v Mohamed 1989 3
(1) SA 171 at 177J178C, the court held that ordinarily, the price fixed in
respect of a contract of sale is payable in money. Where the
consideration is partly in money and partly in goods on which a fixed
value is placed by the parties the contract may, depending upon the
intention of the parties, be treated as one of sale, the price being the
aggregate sum.

The provision of section 17 dealing with ascertaining the intention of
parties also deals with ascertained goods. It should be noted that it also
deals with ascertained goods. Section 16 of the Act states that no
property will pass in ascertained goods, until fully ascertained or
specified.

However, section 18 sets out five rules for ascertaining the intention of
the parties, where their intention cannot be made out under section 17

                                                                                                     57
CLL 817  MODULE 3

(2). In practice, it is important to lay a good emphasis on the usefulness
of the Rules set out as parties more often than not do not have a clear
intention as to the exact time at which property will pass. A contrary
intention expressed subsequently by the parties may be ineffective to
defeat the passing of the property under the Rules. In Dennant v Skinner
and Collom (1948) 2 KB 164, the plaintiff sold a car to B, a swindler, at
an auction, he being the highest bidder. He gave a false name and
address and asked to be allowed to take the car away in return for his
cheque. As a result of the misrepresentations, the plaintiff acceded to
B's request, after obtaining his signature to a document which stated that
the title of the vehicle will not pass until the cheque was honoured.

B sold the car which was subsequently resold to the defendant, B's
cheque was dishonoured and the plaintiff sued to recover the car. It was
held that the property in the car passed on at the fall of the hammer
under Rule 1 of Section 1, and that the intention of the parties as
contained in the written statement was made too late after the contract
had been concluded to prevent the property in the car from passing. That
was to say the written statement did not divest B of property in the car,
therefore, B passed a good title to the purchaser.

It noteworthy that Rule 5 appears to be an inference that would be made,
unless the circumstances suggest otherwise.

4.3.3 How Goods Are Ascertained

The issue is whether ascertainment of goods may be said to be another
way of saying that the goods have been unconditionally appropriated.

The most imperative and complex aspect of Rule 5 is the meaning of the
term unconditionally appropriated. In spite of attempts by the courts no
generic definition has been made of that phrase.

It is evident that a case of unconditional appropriation will not arise if
the seller only meant to let the buyer have the goods on payment.

In Wait and James v Midland Bank (1926) 31 Comm. Cas. 172, the
plaintiff sold off their bulk leaving a balance of 850 quarters, property in
the goods could not pass because the goods had not been separated.

Where an unidentified part of a bulk is sold, one cannot speak of
unconditional appropriation until there is definite separation of the part
sold from the remainder.

It may be stated that what will constitute unconditional appropriation
will vary according to the goods under consideration and the general

58
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

circumstances of the case. The following illustrations may be used as
guide.

1) The issue of appropriation has arisen in a number of shipbuilding
        cases. In such cases, as in the case of all goods to be
        manufactured by the seller, the general presumption is that no
        property in the goods will pass until the article is completed.
        Moreover, the above preposition will prevail even where the
        price of the article is paid in installments.

2) Where goods are being grown by the seller, the property in the
        goods, if well designated, passes as soon as they come into
        existence.

3) Where an unidentified part of a specified bulk is sold the only
        thing required to appropriate the goods to the contract is simply
        to separate the part sold from the remainder, with the consent of
        the parties.

4.3.4 When Does Property Pass

Section 18 Rule 5(1) states that property in the goods passes to the buyer
in a contract of unascertained or future goods only after the goods are
conditionally appropriated and Rule 5 (1) provides that the assent
required for the appropriation may either be express or implied assent of
the other party to the contract.

In Aldridge v. Johnson (1857) 7 E and B 885, the buyer consented to the
method of appropriation by providing the sacks.

On the other hand, if A sells to B 60 yams to be picked by B out of a
large quantity at N10.00 each, property passes when B picks up any 60.
Thus there is an implied assent given before appropriation.

4.3.5 Delivery to a Carrier

From the provisions of Section 18 Rule 5 (2), it can be deduced that by
dispatching goods through post, as a carrier, the seller has
unconditionally appropriated them to the contract. The sub rule does not
lay down that in the circumstances, the buyers assent is deemed to have
been given. The buyer of the goods must assent to the appropriation of
the dispatch of the goods.

Thus in Badische Anilin and Soda Fabrik v Basle Chemical Works
(1898) A.C.200, the House of Lords held that the posting of the ordered
goods vested the property in the buyer at the moment of posting, This, in
effect, transfers the risk in the goods to the buyer while the goods is in

                                                                                                     59
CLL 817  MODULE 3

  the cause of post. It becomes clear from this case that the time when the
  property passed (when the goods are posted) depends on whose agent
  the carrier is.

  Where the seller is required to ship the goods to the buyer, there is an
  assumption that the shipment is an unconditional appropriation with the
  consent of the buyer. Although, under Rule 5(2), delivery of goods to a
  carrier for transmission to the buyer is deemed to be an appropriation of
  the goods to the contract and not the passage of the risk in the goods, if
  it does, the goods will be at the buyer's risk during the course of post.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 13

1) Evaluate the distinction between ascertained goods and unascertained
         or future goods, critically evaluate.

4.4 Summary

In this Unit, learners have been introduced to Section 16 of the Act
which deals with unascertained goods that will not pass to the buyer
except ascertained with clear intention of the parties. Section 18 Rule 5
(1) has also been discussed. This section deals with unascertained goods,
property in the goods passes to the buyer. Property does not pass until
the goods are ascertained. Once the goods are ascertained then property
passes with parties' intention. Although delivery of goods to a carrier for
transmission to the buyer is deemed to be an appropriation of the goods
to the contract in line with Rule 5(2).

4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sale of Goods Act, 1993

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University Of London Press, 2007.

M.C.Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers
        Limited 1992.

Hire Purchase Act, CAP 169
Sofowora General Principles of Business and Coop Law, Soft

        Associates, 1999.

4.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
Property passes for ascertain goods but property passes for
unascertained goods when they become certain.

60
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

MODULE 4 TRANSFER OF TITLE TO NON-OWNER

UNIT 1 TRANSFER OF PROPERTY BY NON-OWNER

1.1 Introduction.
1.2 Learning Outcome
1.3 Transfer of Property by Non-Owner

        1.3.1 Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet
        1.3.2 General Exception
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

1.1 Introduction
\
In some situations, a person who has either no property or whose rights
are defective disposes of goods in circumstances that enable the
innocent buyer to acquire rights to the exclusion of the true owner.
Generally a person cannot transfer a better title than he has himself. This
is captured in the latin maxim nemo dat quod non habet which means
that no one can give what he or she does not have. The purpose of this
rule is to protect the interest of the property owners.

However, there cases where seller either fraudulently or through their
misrepresentations, express or implied, have allowed innocent third
parties who are unaware of the defect in the title deal with such sellers
or their agent in respect of the goods for value. The need to protect such
innocent parties and for the preservation of commercial transactions that
exception that exception to the general rule has evolved over the years.

1.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit, you are expected to be able to discuss and
analyse the concept of Transfer of Property by "Non-Owner" and
identify the relevant section under the Act.

1.3 Transfer of Property by Non-Owner

1.3.1 Nemo Dat Quod Non Habet

As a general rule, a person who buys goods from someone other than the
owner of the goods will not obtain good title to them, and it makes no
difference if he acted in good faith.

If a seller of goods has no property in the goods and does not sell with
the prior consent or authority of the owner, then he cannot transfer a
good title in the goods. This general rule is expressed in the latin maxim

                                                                                                     61
CLL 817  MODULE 4

nemo dat quod non habet (no one can give what he has not got). The Act
in Section 21(1) states that where goods are sold by a person who is not
their owner, and who does not sell them under the authority or with the
consent of the owner, the buyer acquires no better title to the goods than
the seller had.

But the owner can bring an action under the Torts (Interference with
Goods) Act 1977, against anyone who has wrongful possession of the
goods.

Such a situation could occur where a thief sells a stolen car to an
innocent purchaser, or a person misguidedly sells to an innocent buyer a
car that is the subject of a hire purchase contract and is therefore the
property of the finance company. In effect, the main point of Section 21
is that a person who is not the owner of a property cannot transfer title.

In Hollins v Fowler (1875) L.R.7 H.L 757, a Liverpool broker, Hollins,
purchased cotton from another broker, Bayley, who had obtained it from
Fowler, the owner, without title in circumstances of fraud Hollins
purchased the cotton in good faith and sold and delivered it to a
manufacturer. In this instance Fowler was held liable, when sued for
conversion.

Note that the Section 21 (1) in the later part of it states that unless the
owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded from denying the seller's
authority to sell. Then the buyer in that case will have a good title.

An agreement to sell before the seller gets a good title, does not preclude
the buyer after the seller has got a good title. In Anderson v. Ryan, a car
dealer agreed to sell a car to which he had no title, but before the car was
delivered he had obtained title. It was held that Section 21 did not apply
because for the original agreement was not a sale but only an agreement
to sell. It seems that, even if the seller had purported to sell the car
before he had obtained title, his subsequent acquisition of the title would
have gone to feed the contract.

1.3.2 General Exception

1) Sales under Agency

The main exception under this head is the sale by an agent. is created by
Section 21 Rule 1and it states that an innocent buyer would acquire a
good title where the seller sells under the authority or consent of the
owner. In this instance, it means that a sale by an agent without actual
authority will give the purchaser a good title if the sale is within the
agent's apparent or usual authority.

62
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

In essence, the principle of agency may permit a seller who is not the
owner to transfer title to the buyer. The rule is further emphasized in
Section 61 (2) that

"the rules of common law including the law merchant, save in so far as
they are inconsistent with the express provisions of this Act, and in
particular the rules relating to the law of principal and agent... shall
continue to apply to contracts for the sale of goods".

In Bishopsgate Motor Finance Corporation Ltd v. Transport Brakes Ltd
(1949) 1 KB 322, Denning LJ explained that in the development of law,
two principles have striven for mastery. The first is for the protection of
property, no one can give a better title than he himself possesses. The
second is for the protection of commercial transaction: the person who
takes in good faith and for value without notice should get a good title.

Note that the first condition can be overridden by the second.

  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 14

  1. What general principles apply where a person acquires goods
           from a person who is not the owner?

1.4 Summary

The general rule is that a buyer cannot acquire a better title than that of
the seller. This rule can be overridden in particular situations where
someone, who takes in good faith and for value without notice, will
acquire good title and will, therefore, be able to resist the claims of the
original owner. In conclusion, merely being in possession of goods or
even document of titles does not in itself, amount to the person having a
good title to sell. However, one of the main exceptions to this is where
the person has authority to sell, either genuine or otherwise. Section 21
(1) of the Act has done a great deal in protecting the owner of the goods
from fraudsters, while section 61 (1) of the Act also protects the
innocent buyer with good faith through the principle of Principal and
Agent relationships. This is done to protect commercial transaction.

1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sale of Goods Act.

                                                                                                     63
CLL 817                                 MODULE 4

Rawlings, (2007) Commercial Law University Of London Press

Okany (1992) Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers
        Limited.

Hire Purchase Act, CAP 169

M.O.Sofowora, General Principles of Business and Coop Law, (1999)
        Soft Associates.

1.6 Answer To Self-Assessment Exercise

Student should discuss the principle of nemo dat quo non habet
exemption to the doctrine.

64
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 2 EXEMPTION TO THE DOCTRINE OF NEMO
               DAT QUO NON HABET

2.1 Introduction.
2.2 Learning Outcome.
2.3 Special Exemption to the Doctrine of Nemo Dat Quo Non Habet

        2.3.1 Estoppel
        2.3.2 Sale by a Person with Voidable Title
        2.3.3 Sale by a Seller in Possession
        2.3.4 Sale by a Buyer in Possession
        2.3.5 Sale in Market Overt
        2.3.6 Sale by Court Order
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

2.1 Introduction

The nemo dat rule mainly protects the interest of the property owners. In
non-owners are allowed to sell properties that do not belong to them, the
result is better imagined as we have seen in the previous unit of this
module.

At the outset, it must be emphasized that the general rule is well
enunciated in the Section 21 (1) of the Act where goods are sold by a
person who is not their owner, and does not sell them under the
authority or with the consent of the owner, the buyer acquires no better
title to the goods than the seller in this circumstance.

The second aspect of the principle laid down by Denning LJ in
Bishopgate Motor Finance Corp Ltd v. Transport Brakes Ltd (1949) 1
KB 322, is discussed in the last unit as the principle for the protection of
commercial transactions, that is, the person who takes in good faith and
for value without notice should get a good title. This is the principle that
will be well discussed in this unit as the exemption to the nemo dat quo
non habet rule.

It is however pertinent to note that there is a whole lot of exemption to
the rule in section 21 of the Act, but some of them will be discussed
later in this unit.

2.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit, you should be able to learner to discuss the
different types of the exemption to the rule of nemo dat quo non habet
using judicial authorities.

         65
CLL 817  MODULE 4

2.3 Special Exemption to Nemo Dat Quo Non Habet

2.3.1 Estoppel

If the owner of goods represents that another is his agent or allows a
person to represent himself as his agent, although no such agency exists
in fact, he, the owner will be estopped from denying the existence of his
agents authority to act, on his behalf, in relation to the goods. This
exception is created by the later part of Section 21(1) of the Act which
states that "...unless the owner of the goods is by his conduct precluded
from denying the sellers authority to sell".

However, this principle is also well preserved by Section 61(2) of the
Act which states that

" the rule of the common law, including the law merchant, save in so far
as they are inconsistent with the express provision of this act, and in
particular the rules relating to the law of principal and agent...shall
continue to apply to contracts for the sale of goods."

Estoppel could be by representation or by negligence. This will be
discussed briefly with judicial illustrations.

In Henderson & Co. v. Williams (1895) 1 QB 521, the true owner of the
goods represented to the buyer that the person selling was acting as an
agent with authority to sell or is the owner. The owner was held
estopped from denying that authority to sell and the buyer acquired good
title, because he had represented to the buyer in that regard.

On the other hand, it may be otherwise if it could be shown that the
owner has breached the duty of reasonable care owed to the third party
and that this induced the third party to buy the goods so that the
negligence was the proximate cause of the buyer's loss.

In Mercantile Credit Co Ltd v. Hamblin (1965) 2 QB 242, the owner of
a car signed forms in blank, without reading them, in the belief that they
would enable a car dealer, who appeared to be respectable, to raise
money on the security of the car. In fact, the dealer fraudulently used the
forms to sell the car to a finance company. The Court of Appeal held
that a duty of care existed between the owner and the finance company,
but that there was no breach of that duty because she knew the dealer
and reasonably believed him to be respectable. It was therefore not
negligent of her to sign the forms in blank, It was the fraud of the dealer
that caused the loss and not the negligence of the owner

66
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

2.3.2 Sale by a Person with Voidable Title

By section 23, the buyer, who buys in good faith and without notice of
any defect in the title of the seller, will acquire good title if the goods are
bought from a seller whose title is voidable but at the time of the sale it
has not been avoided.

In Kings Norton Metal Co Ltd v Edridge, Merrette Co Ltd (1897)14
TLR 98, a manufacturer of metal received an order from Hallam & Co
and in consequence sent goods. It turned out that Hallam & Co. did not
exist. The rogue resold the goods. It was held that the intention had been
to contract with the writer of the order, and although this had been
induced by a fraudulent misrepresentation, that only made the contract
voidable, but since it had not been avoided before the goods were resold
to a third party, title passed to the latter.

The law of contract governing void and voidable contracts applies in the
instant cases. If property has not passed from the seller to the rogue and
thereafter to the innocent buyer then section 23 will not apply here. See
Cunday v. Lindsay, (1878) 3App Cas 459; Lewis V. Averay 1972 1QB,
198.

2.3.3 Sale by a Seller in Possession

Where a person who sold goods retains possession of them and resells
them, for instance, where A, the seller, sell goods to B and then resells
the same goods to C. If property has passed to B, but the seller is still in
possession of the goods or documents of title to the goods, and the seller
sells them to C, who purchased in good faith and without notice of the
sale to, this second transaction passes title to C. B will only have an
action for breach of contract against the seller. Section 25 of the Act.

For the second buyer to acquire good title, the seller must deliver
possession of the goods or documents of title. merely contracting a
second sale is not sufficient to give title to the second buyer. In Michael
Gearson (Leasing) Ltd v. Wilkinson (2001) QB 514, Machinery was sold
to a finance company and leased back to the seller, who then sold it to a
second finance company and leased back. At all times, the machinery
remained in possession of the seller. It was held that the seller's
acknowledgement to the finance company that the machines were being
held on its behalf amounted to a delivery.

                                            67
CLL 817  MODULE 4

2.3.4 Sale by a Buyer in Possession

Section 25 (2) of the Act states that:

"where a person having bought or agreed to buy goods obtains, with the
consent of the seller, possession of the goods or the documents of title to
the goods, the delivery or transfer by that person, or by a mercantile
agent acting for him, of the goods or documents of title, under any sale,
pledge, or other disposition thereof, to any person receiving the same in
good faith and without notice of any lien or other right of the original
seller in respect of the goods, has the same effect as if the person
making the delivery or transfer were a mercantile agent in possession
of the goods or documents of title with the consent of the owner."

The goods or title to the documents of title must have been obtained
under a sale or an agreement to sell that is bought or agreed to buy.

In Cahn v. Pocketts Channel Steam Packet Co. Ltd(1889) 1 QB 647, a
seller of copper transmitted a bill of exchange for the price together with
the bill of lading to the buyer, X . X did not signify acceptance, but
endorsed the bill of lading to the plaintiffs in accordance with a contract
for resale of the Copper already made. In other words, he did not accept
the bill of exchange but transferred the bill of lading. It was held that,
was someone who had agreed to buy the goods and since the plaintiffs
had taken the transfer of the bill of lading in good faith and without the
knowledge of the original owner's rights, they obtained a good title on
the copper under 25 (2) of the Sales of Goods Act.

2.3.5 Sale In Market Overt

The word market overt was been defined by Jervis, J in Lee v. Bayes
(1856) 18 CB 599 as an open, public and legally constituted market.
Note that an unauthorized market does not qualify as a market overt. To
constitute a sale in a market overt, it must be shown that the sale took
place within the premises of the market, during ordinary business day,
provided it is a sale of goods of the kind normally sold in the market.

Not only must the sale be in a market overt and the whole transaction
effected there, it is vital to show that the sale was open and public. In
Reid v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner (1973)2 AER 97, the sale of
stolen goods took place in a market overt in the morning when the sun
had not risen and it was still only half light. The court held that the
goods should have been sold in day time when all who passed could see
the goods.

68
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

Where stolen goods are sold in market overt, the buyer acquires good
title under section 22 (1) provided he buys in good faith and without
notice of the seller's lack of title.

2.3.6 Sale by Court Order

The second arm of section 21(2) (b) of the sale of Goods Act protects all
sales carried out under the order of a court of competent jurisdiction.
The High Court has the power to order the sale of any goods which may
be of perishable nature, or likely to deteriorate from keeping or which
for any other just and sufficient reason it may be desirable to have sold
at once.

Consequently, a court bailiff acting in compliance with such an order
may exercise a valid power of sale.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 15

1. Briefly explain some types of exemptions to the rule of nemo dat quod non
     habet.

2.4 Summary

In summary it is important to note that someone who has no title to
goods cannot pass the goods to another as enunciated in the general rule
of nemo dat quod non habet. By this, a person cannot give what he does
not have. The innocent purchasers of such goods are protected by the
provisions of the Sale of Goods Act. It pertinent to note that there are
many exemptions to the nemo dat quod non habet rule but some, not all
of them have been discussed in this unit others not discussed are sale by
Mercantile Agent which is not protected under the Sale of Goods Act. It
is however worthy to note that once one of the exemptions to the general
rule is applied and the good is passed, a good title will pass to the
innocent buyer without notice of the original owner of the goods.

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sales of Goods Act.

Rawlings, Commercial Law University Of London Press (2007).

                                                                                                     69
CLL 817                                       MODULE 4

Okany Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers Limited
        (1992)

Hire Purchase Act, CAP 169

Sofowora General Principles of Business and Coop Law, Soft
        Associates, (1999).

2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The exemption to the Doctrine of Nemo Dat Quo Non Habet that
students should cover are

    i. Estoppel

    ii. Sale by a Person with Voidable Title

    iii. Sale by a Seller in Possession

    iv. Sale by a Buyer in Possession

    v. Sale in Market Overt

    vi. Sale by Court Order

70
CLL 817   LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

MODULE 5  DUTIES OF AND REMEDIES FOR THE
          SELLERS AND THE BUYERS

UNIT I DUTIES OF THE SELLER

1.1 Introduction.
1.2 Learning Outcome
1.3 Duties of the Seller

        1.3.1 Duty to Deliver Goods at the Right Time
        1.3.2 Duty to Pass a Good Title
        1.3.3 Duty to Supply Goods of the Right Quantity
1.4 Summary
1.5 References/Further Readings.
1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction

It might have been thought that in a sale of specific goods there would
be an implied condition on the part of the seller that the goods were in
existence at the time when the contract was made. It is the duty of the
seller to deliver the goods, while the buyer has a duty to accept and pay
for the goods. It is important to note that performance of the contract
under sale of goods entails three main things:

1) Delivery by the seller
2) Acceptance by the buyer
3) Payment by the buyer

The duty of one party is the right of the other. Section 27 of the Sale of
Goods Act provides for the rights and duties of both the seller and the
buyer. It states that it is the duty of the seller to deliver the goods and
that of the buyer to accept and pay for them, in accordance with the
terms of the contract of sale.

1.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit, you should be able to explain the duties of the
seller of goods in a sale of goods transaction as provided in the Sale of
Goods Act.

                                                          71
CLL 817  MODULE 5

1.3 Duties of the Seller

1.3.1 Duty to Deliver Goods at the Right Time

Delivery is the voluntary transfer of possession from one person to
another. See Section 62(1). It does not necessarily mean transportation
Transfer of possession may be actual or constructive or conceptualized
as legal possession. It could also be attornment, this occurs where the
goods are in possession of a third party, and delivery takes place when
the third party acknowledges to the buyer that he holds on his behalf.

Stipulation as to time is of essence in the contract of sale of goods. It
does depends on terms of the contract but in the case of Hartley v.
Hymans (1920) All E.R 328, the court held that in ordinary commercial
contracts for the sale of goods, the rule is that time is prima facie of the
essence in the contracts.

If the time for delivery is fixed by the contract, then failure to deliver at
that time will be a breach of condition which justifies the buyer in
refusing to take the goods or where the seller fails to collect the goods
on the appointed day, the seller will be entitled to repudiate the contract.

Where no date is fixed in the contract, delivery by the seller must be
within a reasonable time which will be determined by matters such as
the nature of the goods.

Although time is of delivery, the buyer can waive this condition where
he does, then it will be binding on him whether made with or without
consideration. In Charles Richards Ltd v. Oppenheim (1950) 1 KB 616,
the plaintiffs agreed to supply a Rolls Royce chassis to for the
defendants, to be ready at the least on 20th March, 1948. It was not ready
on that date and the defendant continued, to press for delivery, thereby
impliedly waiving the condition as to the delivery date. By 29th June, the
defendant had lost patience and wrote to the plaintiffs informing them
that he would not accept delivery after 25th July. In fact the Chassis was
not ready until 18th October, and the defendant refused to accept it. The
court held that the defendant was entitled to reject to accept the chassis
as he had given the plaintiffs reasonable notice that delivery must be
made by a certain date.

1.3.2 Duty to Pass Good Title

This is a condition of the contract for which the buyer can terminate the
contract and seek damages for any loss, or affirm the contract and
recover damages for loss. The right of the buyer is to receive the best
title to the goods, that is, title that cannot be defeated by another person.

72
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

Under common law, the general principle of contract was that of caveat
emptor. It may appear that the seller is not deemed to be given any
undertaking as to title but section 12 of the Sale of Goods Act protects
the title of a buyer by imposing a duty on the seller with regard to good
title of the goods sold.

In Rowland v. Divall (1923)2 KB 500, A sold a car to B for 334pounds.
B used the car for two months during which time he also repainted it. B
then sold it for 400pounds to C who used it for a further two months.
The car turned out to have been stolen before it came into A's
possession and was, therefore, taken away from C by the police. The
effect of the nemo dat quod no habeat rule is that the buyer can acquire
no better title than the seller, so neither A nor B had title to the car. C
recovered the purchased price from B and B recovered the purchased
price from A without any allowance for the use. See Akoshile v. Ogidan
(1950) 19 N.L.R 87.

Note that the definition of a contract for sale in section 2(1) does support
the idea that the passing of property is the key issue.
Finally, where the seller does not have title to the goods, the buyer may,
nevertheless, acquire good title under one of the exceptions to the nemo
dat quod non habeat rule. See Barber v. NWS Bank Plc (1996) 1 WLR
641.

1.3.3 Duty to Supply Goods of The Right and Satisfactory
       Quality

There is usually an implied term that the goods supplied under the
contract are of satisfactory quality and correspond with the description.
Goods are regarded as sold by description, where the buyer contracts to
buy the goods in reliance on the description given by or on behalf of the
seller.

In Varley v. Whipp (1900) 1QB 513 the plaintiff agreed to sell to the
defendant a reaping machine described by him as only used to cut 50-60
acres. On taking delivery, the defendant found that it was a very old
machine and returned it to the plaintiff. The plaintiff sued for the price
of the machine, but the defendant relied on section 13. The court held
that the defendant is entitled to reject it, for he had bought the machine,
relying on this description which the machine did not possess.

With reference to satisfactory quality, section 14(2B) will be helpful. It
states that; "the quality of goods includes their state and condition and
the following:

         73
CLL 817                                MODULE 5

1) Fitness for all the purposes for which goods of the kind in
        question are commonly supplied

2) Appearance and finish

3) Freedom from minor defects

4) Safety and

5) Durability.

         See the case of Clegg v. Olle Anderson T/A Nordic Marine
         (2003) EWCA Civ 320.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 16
    1. Discuss the duties of sellers.

1.4 Summary

The comparison between the goods as described and the goods as
delivered is made according to the assessment of a businessperson or a
reasonable consumer and not that of a scientist. Moreso, where there is
an implied condition that the seller must have a right to sell the goods,
so where the seller is in breach of the term, then the buyer is entitled to
the return of the entire purchase price, irrespective of the fact that the
buyer may have used it.

74
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

1.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sales of Goods Act.

Rawlings, Commercial Law University Of London Press 2007.

Okany Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers Limited,
        1992.

Hire Purchase Act, CAP 169

Sofowora General Principles of Business and Coop Law, Soft
        Associates, 1999.

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
The answer should cover the following duties:

       Duty to deliver goods at the right time
       Duty to pass good title
       Duty to supply goods of the right and satisfactory quality

                                                                   75
CLL 817  MODULE 5

UNIT 2 DUTIES OF THE BUYER

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcome
2.3 Duty to pay the Price

        2.3.1 Duty to accept the goods
        2.3.2 Acceptance and Examination
2.4 Summary
2.5 References/Further Readings
2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

2.1 Introduction

Once an agreement with respect to goods has occurred between two or
more people for the purpose of business, they both have duties to fulfill
as buyer and seller of such good. It is however important to note that
these duties are paramount to the success of the business transactions
and will also enhance the growth of commercial transactions world over.
Payment for the goods is a major duty of the buyer as well as the duty to
accept the goods as transacted after the seller fulfills its duty in the
transaction. In this unit, the duty of the buyer is discussed as it is as
paramount as the duties of the seller of the goods.

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of the Unit, you should be able to:
     distinguish between the duties of the buyer from that of the seller
        and
     give a detailed explanation of the duties of the buyer to the seller.

2.3 Duty to Pay the Price

It is the primary duty of the buyer to pay for the price of the goods
supplied to him. Payment for the goods and delivery of the goods are
concurrent conditions and the buyer is not entitled to claim possession
of the goods unless he is ready and willing to pay the price in
accordance with the contract.

Section 28 of the Act states that:
"delivery of the goods and payment of the price are concurrent
conditions, that is to say, the seller must be ready and willing to give
possession of the goods in exchange for the price, and the buyer must be
ready and willing to pay in exchange for possession of the goods."

It is important therefore that the principle of cash on delivery is implicit
in a contract of sale, if the buyer pays by cheque or any negotiable

76
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

instrument that is regarded as a conditional payment, because if the
cheque is dishonoured, the seller may sue for the instrument or for the
price of the goods.

In Bekederemo v. Colgate-Palmolive (Nig) 1976, a clause in the contract
stipulated that "all purchases of the company's goods by the distributor
shall strictly be for cash payments: provided that the company will grant
up to thirty days credit after delivery of goods by the company to the
distributors within which the distributors shall effect payment in full for
all goods received."

The seller supplied goods on nine occasions in 1972 for which the buyer
could not pay cash on all occasions thereby leaving a substantial
balance. Notwithstanding this, the buyer insisted that he was entitled to
further supplies of goods, and that the seller's failure to supply him
amounted to breach of contract. The court held that the seller's duty to
supply the goods and the buyer's obligation to accept them and pay
immediately or within thirty days (if credit was granted) were
concurrent and correlative duties. The buyer therefore could not insist on
deliveries when he was unable to pay for them.

2.3.1 Duty to Accept the Goods

This is also one of the major duties of the buyer, the duty to accept the
goods in accordance with the terms of the contract. In this instance,
acceptance in essence involves taking possession of the goods by the
buyer. And delivery of the goods by the seller is of the essence in the
contract.

Note that if the buyer fails to take delivery in time, that will not justify
the seller in selling the goods to another person, unless the delay is
clearly unreasonable to justify the seller to conclude that the buyer has
repudiated the contract.

2.3.2 Acceptance and Examination

Where goods are delivered to the buyer, which he has not previously
examined, he is not deemed to have accepted them, unless and until he
has had a reasonable opportunity of examining them for the purpose of
ascertaining whether they are in conformity with the contract. See
Section 34(1).

By virtue of Section 34(2), unless otherwise agreed, when the seller
tenders delivery of goods to the buyer, he is bound, on request, to afford
the buyer a reasonable opportunity of examining the goods for the
purpose ascertaining whether they are in conformity with the contract.

                                                                                                     77
CLL 817                                                              MODULE 5

The conduct of the buyer could amount to an acceptance of the goods
having regard to the provisions of section 35. In Hardy and Co. Ltd v.
Hillerns and Fowler (1923) 2 KB 490, X contracted to sell to Y wheat
to be shipped from South America. The ship carrying the wheat arrived
at Hull on 18th March. On 21st March, Y resold and delivered part of the
wheat to Z. On 23rd March, Y had its first opportunity to examine the
goods and, on doing so found them not to conform to the contract.
Consequently, he rejected them. In other words, before the expiration of
a reasonable time for examination, Y rejected the wheat for non-
conformity with the contract. It was held that, the sale and delivery to Z
was an act inconsistent with the ownership of X and Y had, therefore
accepted the goods under section 35 of the Act and lost his right of
rejection.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES 17

    1. Briefly, explain the principle of payment for goods as
         enunciated in the case of Bekederemo v. Colgate-
         Palmolive.

    2. Outline and explain the duties of the buyer in a contract of
         sale of goods.

2.4 Summary

It is important to note that the duties of the buyer are paramount in the
contract between the buyer and the seller in the contract of sale of
goods. The duty of the buyer is the acceptance of the goods and the
payment of the said goods. In some instances, the conduct of the buyer
may make him forfeit his right of rejection after examination of the
goods. The duties of the buyer are important in the contract of sale
especially in C.I.F and F.O.B contract. The most important amongst
them is the duty to examine and accept the goods and also the duty to
pay for the goods. It is pertinent to note that the duties of the buyer are
concurrent with those of the seller in any contract of sale.

2.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sales of Goods Act.

Rawlings, Commercial Law University Of London Press (2007)

Okany Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers Limited
        (1992).

78
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

Hire     Purchase            Act,       CAP  169

Sofowora General Principles of Business and Coop Law, Soft

         Associates (1999).

2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1) In Bekederemo v. Colgate-Palmolive (Nig) 1976, a clause in the
    contract stipulated that "all purchases of the company's goods by
    the distributor shall strictly be for cash payments: provided that
    the company will grant up to thirty days credit after delivery of
    goods by the company to the distributors within which the
    distributors shall effect payment in full for all goods received."
    The seller supplied goods on nine occasions in 1972 for which
    the buyer could not pay cash on all occasions thereby leaving a
    substantial balance. Notwithstanding this, the buyer insisted that
    he was entitled to further supplies of goods, and that the seller's
    failure to supply him amounted to breach of contract. The court
    held that the seller's duty to supply the goods and the buyer's
    obligation to accept them and pay immediately or within thirty
    days (if credit was granted) were concurrent and correlative
    duties. The buyer therefore could not insist on deliveries when he
    was unable to pay for them.

2) The answer should

Duty to pay the Price

Duty to accept the goods

Acceptance and Examination

                                             79
CLL 817  MODULE 5

UNIT 3 REMEDIES OF THE SELLER

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcome
3.3 Remedies of the Seller

        3.3.1 Personal Remedies (Rights in personam)
        3.3.2 Real Remedies (Rights in rem)
3.4 Summary
3.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

3.1 Introduction

The remedies available to the seller will be well enunciated in this unit.
As a starting it is important that the remedies available to the seller are
concurrent with the one available to the buyer.

Apart from personal action on the contract which is available to the
seller where the buyer defaults in payment of the price of goods sold, the
seller may also exercise some real rights to the goods. Note that personal
remedies will only be against the buyer and not third party in case the
goods have been resold, as against real remedy which is against the
goods sold.

It is important to note that the remedy under the two heads is immense
and will be discussed briefly for the purpose of this unit. The personal
remedy of the seller against the buyer is the right of payment and right
to damages. It is a personal right which a third party who benefits from
the goods will not share as against the real remedy of the seller.

3.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of the unit, you should be able to distinguish between a
personal remedy and real remedy of the seller against the buyer.

3.3 Remedies of the Seller

3.3.1 Personal Remedies

The seller of goods under a sale of goods contract has two remedies
under this head available to him as against the ones available under the
real remedies that will be discussed later. This is an action that directly
affects the buyer for the seller to recover sums of money representing
that he has lost, it is a right in personam.

80
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

They are action for the price and action for damage.

1) Action for the Price

An action for the price is an action in debt. The seller has the right to
bring an action for the price. This action could come in two folds under
section 49 of the Act:

(a) If property has passed and the buyer has wrongfully failed to pay
        according to the terms of the contract. This is well enunciated
        under section 49(1) of the Act. In this instance, the seller can sue
        for the price of the goods. In Colley v. Overseas Exporters Ltd
        (1921) 3 KB 302, X sold to Y a quantity of leather F.O.B
        Liverpool, the goods being unascertained at the date of sale. Y
        instructed X to send the goods to Liverpool for shipment on the
        vessel (K) and X did so. The K and other ships substituted could
        not take the leather for which reason the leather remained at the
        dock for two months. X then brought an action against Y for the
        price. It was held that, as the property in the goods had not passed
        to Y and that there was no agreement for the price payable on a
        certain date in respective of delivery.

(b) If the contract stipulates a date for payment without requiring
        delivery and the buyer wrongfully fails to pay, then the seller can
        bring an action for the price of the goods. See Section 49 (2) of
        the Sales of Goods Act.

Generally, the action for price gives the seller certainty, they know
precisely how much they will receive.

2) Action for Damages

Under 50 (1) of the Act, where the buyer wrongfully neglects or refuses
to accept and pay for the goods, the seller will have an action for
damages for non acceptance. The action may be brought whether the
property in the goods has passed or not to the buyer. Note that the
measure of damages is the loss directly and naturally resulting in the
ordinary course of events, from the buyer's breach of contract. See
Section 50 (2).

In Thompson Ltd. v. Robinson (Gunmakers) Ltd (1955) Ch.177. A
contracted to buy a vanguard motor car from B, who were car dealers. A
then refused to accept delivery. There was no shortage of Vanguard. It
was held that B was entitled to damages for the loss of their bargain, i.e

                                                                                                     81
CLL 817  MODULE 5

the profit they would have made as they have sold it less than what they
would have sold it. The seller was obliged to mitigate their loss by
reselling the goods and could not claim for loss. If there is a market for
the goods, the presumption is that damages will be the difference
between the contract price and the market price at the time when the
goods ought to have been accepted, or at the time of refusal to accept if
time is not fixed for acceptance.

3.3.2 Real Remedies

The seller may exercise some real rights against the goods as against the
personal remedies discussed above. These are real rights and are in
relation to the goods. They are rights in rem.

1) Rights of the Unpaid Seller

An unpaid seller is a seller who has not been paid the whole of the price
or when the bill of exchange or other negotiable instrument has been
received as conditional payment and the condition for which it has been
received has not been fulfilled by reason of the dishonour of the
instrument it. See Section 38 (1). It does not matter that the time for
payment has not arrived, note that if the buyer has tendered the price and
the buyer has refused to accept, he cannot be an unpaid seller within the
meaning of the Act. See Lyons and Co v. May and Baker Ltd (1923)
1KB 685

2) Unpaid Sellers Lien

The unpaid seller's lien is the right to retain possession of the goods
until payment, even if the title has passed to the buyer. A lien is a right
to retain possession of goods until payment or tender of the whole price
is made. The lien is available where an unpaid seller is in possession and
section 41 (1) of the Act provides that:

(a) where the goods have not been sold on credit
(b) where it has been sold on credit and the term of it has expired or
(c) where the buyer has become insolvent.

The lien may be exercised against part of the goods where the rest have
been delivered unless delivery indicates an agreement to waive the lien.

A seller has not lost his lien if the following situations occur:

(a) where part of the price has been paid (s38 (1) (a) )
(b) where the seller has obtained judgement for the price of the goods

        (s43(2) )

82
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

(c) where the seller is in possession as agent or bailee of the buyer.

The seller will lose his right of lien in the following instances:

(a) where the buyer has paid or tendered the whole of the contract
        sum (s38(1) (a) )

(b) where the buyer lawfully obtains possession of the goods. In this
        instance, the lien does not revive if the seller regains possession.

(c) by waiver of the lien (S43(1) (c) )

3) Rights of Stoppage in Transit

The right is a right of stopping the goods while they are in transit,
resuming possession of them and retaining possession until payment of
the price. The unpaid seller has the right to resume possession of goods
which are left in his possession as long as they are still in the course of
transit.

The following are the requirements for stoppage of goods in transit. The
method of stoppage is outlined in s46 of the Act, they are stated below
as where:

(a) the seller is unpaid
(b) the buyer is insolvent: that is the buyer is either ceased to pay

        their debts in the ordinary course of business or cannot pay their
        debts as they become due. (s61 (4) )
(c) the goods are in transit

The right of stoppage will end and the right will be lost in the following
circumstances;

(a) If the buyer or his agents obtain delivery before the arrival of the
        goods at their destination (S45 (2). See also Reddall v. Union
        Castle Mail Steamship Co Ltd (1914) 84 LJKB 360.

(b) If, after arrival at the destination, the carrier, bailee or custodian
        acknowledges to the buyer that the goods are held on their behalf
        and that person continues in possession for the buyer.(S45 (3) )

(c) If the carrier wrongfully refuses to deliver the goods (S45 (6))
(d) If a document of title has been transferred to the buyer and there

        has been a further disposition e.g to a new buyer who acts in
        good faith.

         83
CLL 817  MODULE 5

The transit will not have ended if in the following circumstances:

a) there is part delivery, the remainder of the goods may be stopped
        in transit.

b) the buyer rejects goods and the carrier continues in possession of
        them (S45 (4)).

4) Rescission and Re-sale

A contract of sale is not rescinded by the exercise of the rights of lien or
stoppage. Here, the buyer may be able to require delivery on tendering
payment of the price. Where property in the goods has passed to the
buyer, it will not revert in the seller merely because they exercise the
right of lien or stoppage. Note that the seller must terminate the contract
before property in the goods will revert. The property will revert in the
seller if they exercise the right of resale. This is a right that arises if the
seller defaults in which case the original sale contract is rescinded (S48
(4)). This right may also arise in (S48 (3)) as follows:

(a) where there is an unpaid seller
(b) either the goods are perishable, or the seller gives notices of the

        intention to resell
(c) the buyer does not pay or tender the price within a reasonable

        time.

Note that the unpaid seller may resell the goods and recover from the
original buyer damages for any loss caused by this breach. In RV Ward
Ltd v. Bignall (1967) 1 QB 534, the court held that reverting of property
in the seller occurred as a result of rescission of the contract by the seller
following the buyer's breach. The seller elected to rescind by reselling
the goods.

                   SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 17
 (a) Briefly outline the remedies available to a seller under the rights

      in rem.

3.4 Summary

The seller can bring actions against the buyer for price where property
has passed and the buyer has wrongfully failed to pay or for damages
where the buyer wrongfully fails to accept and pay for the goods. The
seller also has a right against the goods: the unpaid seller's lien permits
the seller to retain possession of the goods until payment, while the right

84
CLL 817             LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

of stoppage allows the unpaid seller to stop goods in transit where the
buyer has become insolvent and also he may be able to exercise the right
of resale. In summary, the seller has rights to the goods, that is right in
rem and also right in personam, which is of paramount importance, and
they are remedies available to the seller. The seller has a right to the
price or right to damages in a situation where he has exercised his right
of resale, he can only sue for damages in that regard.

3.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sales of Goods Act

Rawlings, Commercial Law University Of London Press (2007).

Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers Limited
(1992).

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The answer should cover right of lien, stoppage, rescission and resale

                                                                  85
CLL 817  MODULE 5

UNIT 4 REMEDIES OF THE BUYER

4.1 Introduction.
4.2 Learning outcome.
4.3 Remedies of the Buyer

        4.3.1 Recovery of the Price
        4.3.2 Rejection of the goods
        4.3.3 Acceptance
        4.3.4 Damages
4.4 Summary
4.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source

4.1 Introduction

In this unit, the remedies available to a buyer in the sale of goods
contract shall be discussed. As had been said, the remedies of the seller
and those of the buyer are concurrent to each other as they both have
duties to perform in a contract of sale of goods. Both parties therefore,
also have remedies that also go with them contract is breached.

The remedies available to the buyer are also numerous and they range
from recovery of price to rejection of the goods as well as the damages
to mention just a few of the remedies that will be discussed this unit.

4.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of the Unit, you will be able to:

a) discuss the remedies available to a buyer in a sale of goods
        contract.

b) understand and explain the remedies available to buyer of goods
        in a sale of goods contract.

4.3 Remedies of the Buyer

4.3.1 Recovery of the Price

If the buyer has paid the price, he may sue the seller to recover the
amount paid if the goods are not delivered or the consideration for the
payment has failed. (S54 of the Act).

4.3.2 Rejection of the Goods

The buyer can repudiate the contract if the seller is in breach and the
breach goes to the root of the agreement. That is, the breach is a breach

86
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

of condition and not warranty. Breach of contract may arise in the
following ways:

(a) late tender of the goods
(b) breach of an implied condition
(c) right of rejection by virtue of an express or implied term or usage

        of trade.

The motive for rejection is irrelevant as in the case of Arcos Ltd v. E.A.
Ronaasen & Sons (1933) AC 470.

The right of rejection will be lost or will not be available where:

(a) the buyer has accepted the goods (S11(4))
(b) the buyer is unable to return the goods; where the goods has

        passed into the possession of a sub-buyer and cannot be
        recovered.
(c) that there is a breach of a warranty
(d) there is short or over delivery and the shortfall or excess is not
        material (S30 (D)). Here there is no requirement for
        unreasonableness.

Where the buyer has right to reject for breach of condition, he or she
can:

(a) reject the goods and claim damages for any loss
(b) treat the breach as a breach of warranty and claim damages.
(c) waive the breach.

If the buyer wrongly rejects goods, the seller can treat this as a
repudiation of the contract and, if property has passed to the buyer, it
will revert in the seller.

4.3.3 Acceptance

The buyer loses the right to reject the goods if all or part of the goods is
accepted, unless the contract permits rejection after acceptance. (Section
35)

Where a breach justifies rejection, unless there is agreement to the
contrary, the buyer may reject all of the goods or may take those that are
not defective, or may take some of the defective goods and reject the
rest (S35A (2)). In J & H Ritchie Ltd v. Lloyd Ltd (2005) SLT 64, it was
held where the buyers agrees to the repair of the goods and the repair
was properly effected so that the goods conformed with the contract, the
buyer lost the right to reject.

                                                                                                     87
CLL 817  MODULE 5

4.3.4 Damages

Any claim the buyer may have for damages a distinction must be made
between a claim for failure to deliver and a claim relating to goods that
have been delivered.

Failure to deliver may cause loss and the buyer could bring an action for
damages (S51 (1)).

1) If there is an available market for the goods under S51(3) the
        presumption is that the measure of damages is the difference
        between the contract price and the market at the time the goods
        ought to have been delivered at the time of the refusal to deliver.

2) Where the goods are delivered and the buyer elects not to reject
        them (S11 (2)), where the breach does not give rise to the right of
        rejection, it is treated as a breach of warranty and the buyer may
        deduct damages from the price.

Note that the buyer will not be able to claim damages where the loss was
not caused by the breach. In Lambert v. Lewis (1982) AC 225, the seller
of a defective towing equipment was liable for the breach of S14(3), but
not for the damages the buyer had to pay to a third party who was
injured when the buyer continued to use the equipment in spite of
knowing that was defective.

  SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 18

   (a) Mufu agrees to buy 500 planks from Taju for boat building, each
        plank measuring 15cm in width. When delivered, 125 of the planks
        were 14cm wide, 125 were 16cm and the rest were as ordered. All
        the planks were suitable for Mufu's use, but Mufu has now found an
        alternative , cheaper supply of wood and wants to escape from his
        obligations under the contract with Taju. Advise Mufu.

   (b) Adamu contracts to buy 12 bottles of brandy and the seller delivers
        8 bottles of brandy and four bottles of whisky. What can Adamu do
        under the Sale of Goods Act.

4.4 Summary

The buyer can reject goods for defective delivery, breach of an implied
or express condition, or serious breach of an innominate term, unless

88
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

they have accepted the goods or where there is a minor breach.
Rejection does not necessarily constitute rescission of the contract and it
may be possible for the seller to cure a defective delivery. The buyer in a
sale of goods contract may be able to withhold payment of the price
where the seller fails to deliver, or may be able to bring an action in
damages for non-delivery. Wrongful rejection of the goods may be
treated by the seller as a repudiation of the contract.

4.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sales of Goods Act.

Rawlings, Commercial Law University Of London Press (2007).

Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers Limited
        (1992).

Hire Purchase Act.

Sofowora, General Principles of Business and Coop Law, Soft
        Associates (1999).

                                           89
CLL 817  MODULE 5

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
a. The buyer can legally reject the supply because of the breach of the
fundamental term, the size of the plank.
The motive for rejection is irrelevant as in the case of Arcos Ltd v. E.A.
Ronaasen & Sons (1933) AC 470.

b. Generally, a buyer loses the right to reject the goods if all or part of
the goods is accepted, unless the contract permits rejection after
acceptance. (Section 35). Where a breach justifies rejection, unless there
is agreement to the contrary, the buyer may reject all of the goods or
may take those that are not defective, or may take some of the defective
goods and reject the rest (S35A (2)). In J & H Ritchie Ltd v. Lloyd Ltd.

90
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 5 FACTORS AFFECTING LIABILITY UNDER
               CONTRACT OF SALE OF GOODS

5.1 Introduction
5.2 Learning Outcome
5.3 Factors Affecting Liability under Contract of Sale of Goods

        5.3.1 Risk and Frustration
        5.3.2 Mistake
5.4 Summary
5.5 References/Further Readings/Web Source
5.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

5.1 Introduction

There are numerous factors that may affect the smooth running of the
concept of sale of goods. Some have already been discussed. Two
important ones to be like the exemption clauses other to be discussed
here are the doctrines of frustration and mistake. These two factors can
terminate a contract without damages or right to sue for the price of the
goods.

It is however important to note that an act of God or King's enemies' act
can also bring the contract to an end with both the seller and the buyer
losing. The concept of frustration and mistake will be discussed in this
unit.

5.2 Learning Outcome

By the end of this unit you should be able to understand the factors that
may affect the contract of sale of goods through risk, frustration and
mistake.

5.3 Factors Affecting Liability under Contract of Sale of
       Goods

5.3.1 Risks and Frustration

1) Risk

If the goods sold are accidentally lost or damaged, then the loss or
damage will fall on the party who bears the risk and the general rule of
res perit domino, that is, the risk of accidental loss, falls on the owner.
The general principle attributing the risk is laid down in section 20 as
follows:

                                                                                                     91
CLL 817  MODULE 5

"unless otherwise agreed, goods remain at the seller's risk until the
property therein is transferred to the buyer, but where the property is
transferred to the buyer, the goods are at the buyer's risk whether
delivery has been made or not."

In section 16 of the Act, property in goods cannot pass until they are
identified. The risk is not usually upon the buyer in the case of
unascertained goods. In this respect, the opening word of Section 20
should be noted. It states that parties may agree that risk will pass before
or after property. (See Sterns Ltd v. Vickers Ltd (1923) 1KB 78)

2) Frustration

The general principle of law of contract is that where a contract has been
frustrated, the rights and obligations of the parties are terminated and
remain in the position in which they were at the time when the
frustrating event occurred.

Section 7 of the Act buttress this point by providing and states that
"where there is an agreement to sell specific goods, and subsequently
the goods, without any fault on the part of the seller or buyer, perish
before the risk passes to the buyer, the agreement is thereby frustrated."
From this point it clear that section 7 discharges the parties of their
obligations under the contract at the occurrence of a peril on the goods.

It is important to note that the perishing of specific goods is the only
aspect of frustration provided for by the Act. Perishing of goods cannot
frustrate a contract otherwise than under section 7. In Re Shipton
Anderson and Co Ltd v. Harrison Bros. & Co Ltd (1915)3 KB 676, the
court clearly thought there could be no frustration if property and risk
had both passed.

5.3.2 Mistake

The discussion of this topic here will be limited to the Sale of Goods Act
of 1893 where it relates to sale of specific goods which have perished.
Section 6 of the Act is the section that makes provision for the doctrine
of mistake, and it states that

"where there is a contract for the sale of specific goods, and the goods
without the knowledge of the seller have perished at the time when the
contract is made, the contract is void".

In Couturie v. Hastie (1856) 5H.L.C. 673, the defendant was a del
credere agent who sold, on behalf of the plaintiffs, a cargo of corn
shipped from Salonika. Before the date of the sale, the cargo had been

92
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

lawfully sold by the master of the ship. The purchaser repudiated the
contract, and the plaintiff sued the agent, whose liability depended on
whether the purchaser would have been liable. It then held that, the
defendant was not liable and that the contract was void for mistake.

                         SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 19

   1. The general principle of law of contract is that where a contract has been
        frustrated, the rights and obligations of the parties are terminated and
        remain in the position they were at the time when the frustrating event
        occurred. Critically examine this assertion with decided cases and
        relevant statutes of the law.

   2. Sheron sold goods to Benson with the notion that the goods were still in
        existence, but at the time of the contract the goods was no longer in
        existence. Advise Benson.

5.4 Summary

The factors affecting the sale of goods contract, which range from risk to
frustration and to mistake, are discussed in this unit. However, passing
of risk in sale of goods contract depends on circumstances of each case,
where generally risk passes with property. In cases of Frustration, the
general principle is that parties return to status quo. In the case of
mistake, the contract is void ab initio. The passing of risk in goods must
pass with the goods as a general principle of the law.

5.5 References/Further Reading/Web Source

Sales of Goods Act.

Rawlings, Commercial Law, University Of London Press, (2007).

Okany, Nigerian Commercial Law, Africana .FEP Publishers Limited,
        (1992).

Hire Purchase Act.

Sofowora General Principles of Business and Coop Law, Soft
        Associates, (1999).

5.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
a. Student should provide a critical examination of frustration with
decided cases and relevant statutes of the law.
b. The contract is void by mistake , Couturie v. Hastie.

                                                                                                     93
CLL 817                                                MODULE 6

MODULE 6  E-COMMERCIAL CONTRACTS AND
          VARIOUS PAYMENT DEVICES

UNIT 1 DEFINITION AND FORMATION OF E-
               COMMERCIAL CONTRACT

1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Definition and Formation of E-Commercial Contract

        1.3.1 Definition E-Commercial Contract
        1.3.2 Formation of E-Commercial Contract
1.4 Summary
1.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction

Today's world is driven by ICT and internet. The internet age means
that virtually everything except where physical contact is required can
be initiated and completed online without any physical contact. The
mode of commercial transaction has evolved over the years from trade
by barter, to use of legal tender and today's e-commerce. Commercial
contracts such as contract of sale of goods can be concluded without the
buyer and seller meeting physically with each other. This has brought
faster means of conducting business transactions, different from that of
paper and face to face transactions as the steps that are necessary to
conclude and form an e-contract is different and may be considered
more technical than usual traditional contracts. Therefore, the focus of
this unit is on definition and formation e-commercial contract.

1.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of this unit, you will be able to understand and discuss the
meaning and formation of e-commercial contract.

1.3 E-Commercial Contract

3.1 Definition of E-Commercial Contract

E-contracts are contracts that are executed and enacted by a software
system in the sense that they are not concluded by face to face
communications i.e. the "seller and buyer" or "supplier and consumer"
do not meet in person to form, negotiate and execute the terms of their
contract. E-contract is also called distance or online contract. Distance
contracts are contracts concerning goods or services concluded between

94
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

a supplier and a consumer under an organised distance sales which for
the purpose of the contract, makes use of one or more means of distance
communications such as internet, e-mails, telephones and so on up to
and including when the contract is concluded. (McMahon Legal).

USLegal states regarding e-contract as follows:

E- Contract any kind of contract formed in the course of e-commerce by
the interaction of two or more individuals using electronic means, such
as e-mail, the interaction of an individual with an electronic agent, such
as a computer program, or the interaction of at least two electronic
agents that are programmed to recognize the existence of a contract. The
US Uniform Computer Information Transactions Act provides rules
regarding the formation, governance, and basic terms of an e-contract.
Traditional contract principles and remedies also apply to e-contracts.

Akintude defined electronic contract as a piece of information,
communications, or correspondences in an electronic document, creating
obligations between two or more correspondents that are enforceable or
otherwise recognisable at law. It is a settle principle of law that
generally there is no specific form in which a contract may be created.
Thus, in U.B.N. Plc. v Ogunsiji (( 1 NWLR (Pt. 1334) 1 at p. 13) the
court held that it is elementary law that a contract may be demonstrated
by the conduct of the parties, as well as by their words and deeds or by
the documents that passed between them. The present reality is that
contract can be created orally, in writing, by conduct or by online
communications, a process which we call online or electronic contract.

1) Issues and Sources of Conflict

(a) Issues Arising from E-Commercial contract:

The issues commonly associated with e-commercial contract include:

 various steps that are necessary for the formation of a distance
        contract,

 the various prior information that is required to be given by the
        supplier to a consumer by various laws,

 the issue of domain names,
 the issue of whether the subject matter of the contract is one of

        goods or services and what the law provides,
 the issues of performance in a contract such as part- performance

        and the consequences of non-performance by parties to the
        contract in relation to services that a consumer is entitled to such
        as delivery services, maintenance services, refund,
 the rights and duties of both parties to a contract,

                                                                                                     95
CLL 817  MODULE 6

 remedies that are available to the consumer in the case of disputes
        that may arise,

 different requirements of an information service provider in
        relation to distance contracts and the provisions of information
        society services.

(b) Sources of conflict:

The likelihood of conflict is inevitable in distance contracts because
disputes are likely to arise as a result of the fact that such contracts are
concluded by electronic means which are not completely efficient as
they have their disadvantages. The first is the issue of conflict of laws
and jurisdiction arising on the ground that either party will want to
enforce the law that will give more redress to them.

Secondly, the fact that a site has an `.ng' domain name does not mean
that it trades from within Nigeria, or that the company operating it is
registered or established in Nigeria. Also, for security reasons most web
servers are kept geographically separate from the physical undertaking
of the business.

3.2 Formation of E-Contracts

The issue of formation of e-contracts is one that is of great contention
till date because there are different ways by which e-contracts are
concluded and their principles are different from paper transactions. The
three common ways in which e-contracts are formed are by:

(a) exchange of emails and attachments,
(b) ordering on-line for goods which were advertised in a website

        and
(c) Electronic data interchange (EDI) network exchange. EDI is the

        practices of electronically communicating information that was
        traditionally communicated on paper, such as purchase orders and
        invoices. Technical standards for EDI exist to facilitate parties
        transacting such instruments without having to make special
        arrangements.
        It is a basis requirement that for a contract to come into existence,
        there must be an offer made by the `offeror or supplier" to
        "offeree or consumer" and an acceptance has to be communicated
        back to the offeror before a contract can be said to be in
        existence.

96
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

According to Andrew D. Murray, the two basic methods of electronic
contracting are:

a) Electronic mail, or E-mail: This is digital equivalent of a letter. It
        may be typed, sometimes attached, addressed and then send to
        your desired recipient. It can be used to make an offer or to
        communicate acceptance. It can be used for advertisements and
        circulars.

b) Click ­ Wrap Method: This method is used by the webpage
        operator to place an advert on its page called a web-
        advertisement, offering a product or service for sale (which
        constitute an invitation to treat). On this webpage will be a
        hypertext order form which the customer will fill out. At the end
        of this form will be a button saying `submit' or `I Accept', or
        something similar. When the customer clicks this button, they
        submit their order to the Web site operator. This is like taking the
        goods to the cash register in a shop, except that the cashier will
        usually be a computer instead of a person.

However, whichever method is used for the formation of an electronic
contract, it is important that the five essential ingredients of a valid and
enforceable contract as recognised by the law are present. These
essential elements are: offer, acceptance, consideration, capacity to
contract and intention to create legal obligation. The absence of these
element make such agreement or the alleged unenforceable as affirmed
in the case of Metibaye v. Narelli International Ltd. (2009) 16 NWLR
(Pt.467) 326; B.F.I.G. v. B.P.E (2008) ALL FWLR (Pt.416) 1915.

                   SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 18

Critically examine the definition of e-contract and its formation

1.4 Summary

E-commercial contract is driven by the emergence of technologies. It
has brought changes to the way parties' contract, yet the basic elements
for the formation of a valid contract must be present for a valid in e-
contract.

                                                                   97
CLL 817  MODULE 6

1.5 Reference/Further Reading/Web Source

Adam, K.I., "E-Commerce: Issues and challenges for the Nigerian Law"
        University of Ilorin Law Journal (2014) Vol 1, 97-107.

Anthony Idigbe "Legal and Institutional Framework For E-Commerce
        In Nigeria" Being lead discussant paper delivered at Bankers
        House, PC 19 Adeola Hopewell St., V/I, Lagos June 2010 June.

Adejoke O. Oyewuni, "The ICT Revolution and Commercial Sectors in
        Nigeria: Impacts and Legal Interventions" (2012) Vol 5, No.2,
        British Journal of Arts and Social Science. pp.234-247

Martylda's Law Blog, Electronic Contract and Its Enforceability
        in Nigeria, September 19, 2017

Andrew Murray, Information Technology Law: The Law and Society
        (Oxford University Press 2016)

USLegal, E-Contract Law and Legal Definition
        <https://definitions.uslegal.com/e/e-contract/>

E-Contract Law and Legal Definition available at
        <https://definitions.uslegal.com/e/e-contract/>

McMahon Legal http://mcmahonsolicitors.ie/distance-contracts/
J. Lloyd, Information Technology Law Ian (Oxford University Press

        2014).

1.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
        The answer should reflect that the formation of an electronic
        contract, it is important that the five essential ingredients of a
        valid and enforceable contract as recognised by the law are
        present. These essential elements are: offer, acceptance,
        consideration, capacity to contract and intention to create legal
        obligation. The absence of these element make such agreement or
        the alleged unenforceable as affirmed in the case of Metibaye v.
        Narelli International Ltd.

98
CLL 817            LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

UNIT 2 REGULATION OF E-COMMERCIAL
               CONTRACT IN NIGERIA

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Regulation of E-Commercial Contract in Nigeria
2.4 Summary
2.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
2.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

2.1 Introduction

The advent of this special species of commercial transactions has
necessitated the need for law regulating to govern and ensure the
homogeneity of the conditions under which such transactions are made
through the internet

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit, you are expected to be able to discuss the
relevant laws regulation e-commercial contract in Nigeria.

2.3 Regulation of E-Commercial Contract in Nigeria

The laws regulating e-commercial contract in Nigeria are discuss below.

(a) National Information Technology Development Agency Act,

         2010 and

(b) Cyber Crimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc.) Act, 2015

Section 17 of the Cyber Crimes Act 2015 which provides

effective legal    recognition of Electronic Signature and provides

legal sanction     for forgery, misrepresentation and falsification.

(c) Other relevant bills that are still pending include Electronic

         Transactions Protection Bill of 2010; Electronic Commerce

         (Provision of Legal Recognition) Bill 2008; Electronic Fraud

         (Prohibition) Bill of 2008; Computer Security and Protection Bill

         of 2009; Nigerian Antitrust (Enforcement, Miscellaneous

         Provisions, etc) Bill 2008; Security Communication Interception

         and Monitoring Bill of 2009; National Internal Security Bill of

         2009; Cyber Security and Data Protection Agency

         (Establishment) Bill of 2008.

(d) Other relevant sections of other laws which aid the enforceability

         of electronic contract are:

                                                                      99
CLL 817  MODULE 6

 Section 4 of the Statute of Frauds 1677 which provides that no
        action shall be brought on some types of contract unless it be in
        writing and signed.

 Section 84 of the Evidence Act 2011 which provides for the
        admissibility of computer-generated evidence.

 Section 93(3) of the Evidence Act 2011 which acknowledges
that an electronic signature satisfies the rule of law as to signature
(e) Section 47 of the CBN Act which makes any physical or

        electronic record of transactions that is in a format approved by
        the Bank to constitute sufficient proof of such transactions.

   SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 20

   Discuss the regulation of e-commercial contract in Nigeria

2.4 Summary

The unit enumerated the existing legal framework regulating the e-
commercial contract in Nigeria. It also identified bill awaiting the assent
of the President in Nigeria The emergence of e-commercial contract
brought with it new issues that required law to regulate. Nigeria has
taken steps in this regard but there are some bills addressing other
remaining issues awaiting the assent of the President to become law.

2.5 Reference/Further Reading/Web Source

Adam, K.I., "E-Commerce: Issues and challenges for the Nigerian Law"
        University of Ilorin Law Journal Vol 1 97-107 at 98

Anthony Idigbe SAN (2010 June). Legal and Institutional Framework
        For E-Commerce In Nigeria Being lead discussant paper
        delivered at Bankers House, PC 19 Adeola Hopewell St., V/I,
        Lagos

InfoDev and ITU 2009
        http://www.letregualtionstoolkit.org/en/sections.html.

P.C. Obutte, `ICT Laws in Nigeria: Planning and Regulating a Societal
        Journey into the future' Potchefstroom Electronic Law Journal
        (2014) 17(1) 419-451

Ikenga K. E. Oraegbunam, `The Internet and its Facility for Criminality:
        Some Unique Difficulties for Investigation and Prosecution'

100
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

        (2014). Vol. 5. Nnamdi Azikiwe University Journal of
        International Law and Jurisprudence 12

Electronic Contract And Its Enforceability In Nigeria September 19,
        2017 Martylda's Law Blog

USLegal, \ E-Contract Law and Legal Definition available at
        https://definitions.uslegal.com/e/e-contract/

2.6. Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
        The answer should cover the relevant laws such as National
        Information Technology Development Agency Act, 2010 and
        Cyber Crimes (Prohibition, Prevention, Etc.) Act, 2015 Section
        17 of the Cyber Crimes Act 2015, Evidence Act, CBN Act, etc.

                                                                     101
CLL 817  MODULE 6

UNIT 3 THE VARIOUS PAYMENT DEVICES

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Various Payment Devices
3.4 Summary
3.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Source
3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction

In commercial transaction there are various devices developed to ease
the payment of goods and services. The traditional devices are now
complemented and in some cases replaced by the electronic payment
devices. This unit examines these various payment devices.

3.2 Learning Outcome

At the end of the unit you should be able to discuss and analysis the
various payment devices.

3.3 Various Payment Devices and CBN Regulation

3.3.1 Various Payment Devices

The various devices are examined below.

1) Cheque:

It is a bill of exchange drawn on a banker, payable on demand. In
operation, it is a mandate or authority by a bank customer called the
drawer to his or her bank to pay the named person called the drawee
from customer's account with the bank. Cheque is basically negotiable
instruments. However, the Bills of Exchange Act 1882 provides that a
cheque may be crossed. If endorsed by the words `not negotiable', it
means that the cheque cannot be negotiated. If the words `account
payee' or `account payee only' is endorsed on a cheque it means that the
it cannot be passed from one person to another person.

2) Credit Card:

A credit card is a thin rectangular slab of plastic or metal issued by a
financial company, that lets cardholders borrow funds with which to pay
for goods and services. It is a small rectangular plastic card issued by a
bank, building society, and other financial company that allows the
holder to borrow funds from them to purchase goods or services. Credit

102
CLL 817  LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

cards impose the condition that cardholders pay back the borrowed
money, the interest and any additional agreed charges . Today, credit
card is the most popular payment methodologies for buying consumer
goods and services globally.

3) Debit Card:

A debit card is a plastic payment card like credit card that can be used
instead of cash and deducts money directly from a consumer's account
when use to make a purchase unlike credit card. The main advantage is
that it eliminates the need to carry cash when making purchases. A debit
card is also called bank card, plastic card or check card.

4) A luncheon voucher (LV):

This is a paper or electronic ticket (voucher) used by some employees in
the United Kingdom to pay for meals in private restaurants. Initially, it
was introduced by companies to subsidise midday meals (luncheons) for
their employees without having to run their own canteens. Cambridge
dictionary defines it as `a type of ticket given to people by their
employer that they can use instead of money for buying meals in some
restaurants'. There are presently different types of vouchers such as fuel
vouchers.

5) Point of Sale (POS) System

A POS System consists of software and hardware used to manage
business. It may be used to analyse and order your inventory,
employees, customers, and sales. Also, it is used for receiving of
payment of goods and services. Traditionally, POS systems an on-site
server which requires that it could only run in a specific area of your
store and uses desktop computer, cash register, receipt printer, barcode
scanner, and payment processor. However, since early 2000s, owning
to the technological breakthrough with the advent of cloud-based storage
and computing, the mobility of POS technologies has become a reality.

6) Automated Teller Machine (ATM)

An automated teller machine (ATM) is an electronic banking outlet
provides self service to customers by allowing customers to complete
basic financial transactions without the aid of a branch representative or
teller. To use this system, one must have either a credit or debit card.

7) Mobile Point of Sale (MPOS)

         103
CLL 817  MODULE 6

System Mobile Point of Sale systems (mPOS) are becoming
increasingly popular because of its mobility breaking barrier of distance.
It can be used at regular retailer stores ant by street merchants at town
fairs. A Mobile Point of Sale system performs the same functions as a
traditional cash register except that it's portable. It can be plugged into a
smartphone or touch-screen tablet's audio jack or charging port. The
portability and connectivity to the internet make possible its mobility
and opened up a world of opportunities for businesses, particularly small
businesses.

3.3.2 Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) Rules and Regulations

The CBN produces Rules and Regulations to ensure appropriate
governance, management and operation of the payment systems
infrastructure. Therefore, the following are produced by the CBN
1) Revised Nigeria Bankers' Clearing Rules
2) Operational Rules and Regulations for the Nigeria Central Switch

        (NCS)
3) Regulatory Framework for Mobile Payments Services in Nigeria
4) Nigeria Direct Debit Scheme
5) Guidelines on Nigeria Banks Clearing and Settlement System
6) Guidelines for Cheque Truncation in Nigeria
7) Standards and Guidelines on Automated Teller Machine (ATM)

        Operations in Nigeria
8) Guidelines on Point of Sale (POS) Card Acceptance Services
9) Guidelines on Stored Value/Prepaid Card Issuance and

        Operations
10) Guidelines on Electronic Banking in Nigeria

        These new guidelines are available on the CBN website.

          SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE 20

  Examine the various payment devises and the steps

  taken by the CBN at regulating them.

3.4 Summary

This unit examined the various payment devises and identified the CBN
regulation of these devises. The technological advancement heralded
unprecedented shift in the mode of payment of goods and services. The
emergence of online and mobile banking and other payment devices
requires the CBN to evolve and develop new regulations aim at ensuring
appropriate governance, management and operation of the payment
systems.

104
CLL 817            LAW OF COMMERCIAL AND CONSUMER PROTECTION LAW I

3.5 Reference/Further Readings/Web Sources

CBN Guidelines on Web Acceptance Services including monetary
        service.

CBN Guideline Central Bank of Nigeriaguidelines on Operations of
        Electronic Payment Channels in Nigeria June 2020

Go Century `What is a Mobile POS System?' <GoCurrency -
        <https://medium.com/@GoCurrency/what-is-a-mobile-pos-
        system-2cfbb62a0bca> Posted Jun 4, 2019 ·

CreditCards.com (2006-03-22). "Prepaid debit card benefits and

         disadvantages"  <https://www.creditcards.com/credit-card-

         news/prepaid-debit-card-benefits-1271/>.

"A Study on Debit Cards" (PDF). www.indusedu.org.

Cambridge                Online                    Dictionary

         <https://dictionary.cambridge.org/dictionary/english/luncheonvou

         cher>

Guardian,com `Luncheon vouchers help workers get cheaper meals ­

         archive,                1957''                                 -

         https://www.theguardian.com/food/2019/feb/06/workers-benefit-

         from-luncheon-vouchers-archive-1957

nvestopedia.com `'What is a Credit Card? Andrew Bloomenthal

         Reviewed By Thomas J. Catalano Updated Apr 17, 2020

         <https://www.investopedia.com/terms/c/creditcard.asp>

3.6 Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

The answer should cover various payment options available, the
CBN regulations on these payment options as well as an assessment
of the strength and weakness of such regulations.

                                                                105
