CRD 203                                          MODULES

COURSE
 GUIDE

CRD 203
COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Course Team:  Lawal, K. A. A Ph.D (Course Writer/Developer)
              Department of Entrepreneurial Studies
              Faculty of Management Sciences,
              NOUN
              Grace Dallong-Opadotun
              Faculty of Law
              NOUN

              Dr. Akujobi, A. T (Course Editor)
              NOUN

              Dr. Lawal, Kamaldeen A. A (HOD)
              Faculty of Management Sciences
              Department of Entrepreneurial Studies
              NOUN

              Dr. Ishola, T. O (Dean)
              Faculty of Management Sciences
              NOUN

NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

                                                                                                       i
CRD 203                              COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

National Open University of Nigeria
Headquarters
University Village
Plot 91 Cadastral Zone
Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway
Jabi, Abuja.

Lagos Office
14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos

e-mail: centralinfo@noun.edu.ng
URL: www.noun.edu.ng

Published by:
National Open University of Nigeria

ISBN:

Printed: 2017

All Rights Reserved

ii
CRD 203                       MODULES

CONTENTS                      PAGE

Introduction
Course aims
Course objectives
Working through this course
Course materials
Study units
Course marking
Course overview
Facilitator/Tutors/Tutorials
Summary

                              iii
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

INTRODUCTION

Cooperative Legislation is a semester course. It will be available to all
students towards fulfilling core requirements for an Undergraduate
Degree in Cooperative and Rural Development of Department of
Entrepreneurship Studies. The course will discuss basic Cooperative
Legislation. This course guide tells you briefly what the course is about,
what course materials you will be using and how you can work your
way through these materials. It suggests some general guidelines for the
amount of time you are likely to spend on each unit of the course in
order to complete it successfully. It also gives you some guidance on
your tutor- marked assignments (TMAs). Detailed information on
TMAs is found in the separate assignment file, which will be available
to you in due course. There are regular tutorial classes that are linked to
the course. You are advised to attend these sessions.

COURSE AIMS

The aim of the course can be summarized as follows: this course aims to
give you an understanding of general principles of Cooperative
Legislation.

COURSE OBJECTIVE

Set out below is the wider objectives of the course as a whole. By
meeting these objectives you should have achieved the aims of the
course as a whole.

On successful completion of this course, you should be able to:

 define functions and nature of cooperative legislation
 define the history of cooperative legislation in Nigeria
 define registrar of cooperative societies and his/her functions ­

         statutory and non-statutory
 discuss on promotion of cooperative organization
 discuss on registration of cooperative societies
 discuss on provision of model byelaws
 discuss on examination, inquiry, liquidation, arbitration, e.t.c
 discuss on cooperative societies rules ­ the main features

        compared to the law, the agents and organs of cooperative
        societies
 discuss detailed treatment of general meetings, management,
        committee and board of directors
 discuss on the special role of the secretary
 discuss on the conflicts in the functions of the registrar and
        suggestions for resolving the conflicts

iv
CRD 203                                             MODULES

 discuss on the preparation of bye-laws and their contents
 discuss on bye-laws of other similar self-help organizations

        (SHOS)
 discuss on the limitation of the present cooperative laws.

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE

To complete this course you are required to read the study units, read set
books and other materials. At the end of the course is a final
examination. The course should take you about 12 weeks or more in
total to complete. Below you will find listed all the components of the
course, what you have to do and how you should allocate your time to
each unit in order to complete the course successfully on time.

COURSE MATERIALS

Major components of the course are:

1. Course guide
2. Study units
3. Textbooks

In addition, you must obtain the set book; these are not provided by
NOUN, obtaining them is your own responsibility. You may purchase
your own copies. You may contact your tutor if you have problems in
obtaining these textbooks.

STUDY UNITS

There are 24 study units in this course as follows

Module 1

Unit 1    Nature and concept of Cooperative Legislation
Unit 2    Historical Antecedents of cooperative legislation in
          Nigeria
Unit 3    Cooperative Legislation, Practice and Procedure
Unit 4    The Registrar of Cooperatives
Unit 5    Nature of and Provisions in the Regulations/Rules of Co-
          operative Societies
Unit 6    Sources of Cooperative Laws in Nigeria

Module 2

Unit 1    Registration of Cooperative

                                                    v
CRD 203     COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Unit 2    Functions of Boards of Director in a Co-operative
          Organization
Unit 3    Nature of General Meetings in a Co-operative Society
Unit 4    Nature of a Management Committee in a Co-operative
          Society
Unit 5    Roles of Management Committee
Unit 6    Composition of a Management Committee

Module 3

Unit 1    Functions of the officials of management committee
Unit 2    Delegation of Management Committee functions
Unit 3    Audit Inspection and enquiry committee
Unit 4    Procedures for Auditors appointment
Unit 5    Functions and Powers of Auditors
Unit 6    Inquiry and inspection of co-operatives

Module 4

Unit 1    Distribution and uses of Net Surplus in a Co-operative
          Society
Unit 2    Dividend Payment and Interest on Shares of Co-operative
          Societies
Unit 3    Liquidation of Registered Society
Unit 4    Appointment of a Liquidator and Powers of a Liquidator
Unit 5    Arbitration and Cooperative Society
Unit 6    Public Accountability

The study units if well-read and understood will assist you in passing
your exams.

REFERENCES

Adeyeye, S.O. (1978): The Co-operative Movement in Nigeria-
        Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow. Gottingen-Vandenhoech and
        Ruprecht.

Akinwumi, J.A. (1985): Mobilization of Rural Savings Through Co-
        operative Type (Self-Help) Institutions for Investment in Local
        Development (Africa).A case study of co-operative thrift and
        credit societies, the co-operative bank and the investment and
        trust society: ILO Research Report.

Akaki, E.O. (Ed.) (1992). Essays on Company Law, University of Lagos
        Press (for Department of Commercial and Individual Law)
        Unilag.

vi
CRD 203  MODULES

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers.

Cooperative Society Decree 90 of 1993. Cooperative Society Decree 90
        of 1993 (1990). Laws of the Federation.

Dr. VishNood Bhagwan, Vidya Bhushan (2009). Public Administration.
        S. Chand and Co. Limited, pp. 66 ­ 70.

Elias, T.O. (1969). Law in a Developing Society. Being Inaugural
        Lecture delivered at the University of Lagos on 17 January on the
        topic "Nigerian Land Law and Custom".

Ezejiofor, Gaius (2005). The Law of Arbitration in Nigeria. Longman
        Publishers.

Ihimodu, I.I. (1988):Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
        Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
        Nigeria

Kennedy.(1983):Economic Theory of co-operative enterprises. The
        Plunkett Foundation for co-operative studies. Oxford, UK.

Kachukwu, E.I. and Ozekhome, Mike A.A. (1988). Nigeria Law of
        Contract. Mikzek Publications Limited.

Nigeria Law Digest (2006). Lexis Nexis Publishers.

Obilade, A.O. (1979). Nigerian Legal System. London: Sweet and
        Maxwell Publishers.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Oyakhiromen, I. (2009). The Nigerian Legal System. NOUN published
        course material, pp.

Orojo, J.O. (1992). Company Law and Practice in Nigeria. Third
        edition. Mmbeji V. Associate Nigeria Limited at page 2.

Samuel, A.O. (1987): A critical Assessment of Co-operatives Thrift and
        Credit Societies as a source of funds to cocoa farmers in Ekiti-
        East local government area, Ondo state. Unpublished B.Sc.
        Thesis. Department of Agricultural Economics, University of
        Ibadan, Nigeria.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates

         vii
CRD 203            COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

The Co-operative Societies Act of Kenya (2004) Amended. No 12 of
        1997 as Amended in 2004.

Vishnoo, Bhaawan and Vidya Bhushai. Public Administration. S. Chand
        Higher Academy, pg. 67.

ASSESSMENT

There are two aspects to the assessments of the course. First are the
TMAs, second, there is written examination.

In tackling the assignments, you are expected to apply information,
knowledge and techniques gathered during the course. The assignments
must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in accordance
with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the
Assignment file. The work you submit to your tutor for assessment will
count for 30% of your total course mark.

At the end of the course you will need to sit for a final written
examination for two hours duration. This examination will also count
for 70% of your total course mark.

COURSE MARKING

The following table lays out how the actual course mark allocation is
broken down:

ASSESSMENTS        MARKS
Assignments 1 ­ 4  For assignments best three marks of the four
                   counts at 30% of course marks.
Final examination  70% of overall course marks
Total              100% for course marks.

FACILITATOR/TUTORS/TUTORIALS

There are 10 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You
will be notified of the dates, times and location of these tutorials,
together with the name and phone numbers of your tutor, as soon as you
are allocated a tutorial group.

Do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone, email, or during
tutorial sessions if you need to. The following might be circumstances in
which you would find help necessary. Contact your tutor if:

1. You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned
        readings.

viii
CRD 203  MODULES

2. You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
3. You have a question or problem with an assignment or with your

        tutors comments on an assignment or with the grading of an
        assignment.
4. You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only
        change you have face to face contact with your tutor and to ask
        questions which are answered instantly. You can raise any
        problem encountered in the course tutorials; prepare a questions
        list before attending them. You will learn a lot from participating
        in discussions actively.

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING

The final examination on Co-operative Legislation will be a question
paper of 21/2 ­ 3 -hour duration weighing 60% of the total marks as
earlier stated. All areas of the course will be examined. As a result, it is
very important you read through the whole course material as many
times as possible as mere permutation may disappoint you. You might
find it useful to review yourself tests, TMA assignments and comments
on them before the period of examinations.

Final Advice

Organize how to manage your time. Do everything to stick to it. The
major reason many students fail is that they take things for granted and
delay in taking decisions, only to be rushing unnecessarily towards exam
period. If you get into difficulties with your schedule, do not waste time
to let your tutor know before it is too late to help you. When you are
confident and satisfied that you have achieved a units objectives, you
can then move on to the next unit.

Proceed, unit by unit, through the course, pacing your studies and
making the whole exercise easy for yourself.

SUMMARY

Do your best to read up all the modules and units of the course in order
to gain the most from this course.

Wishing you a happy and enjoyable reading time.

         ix
CRD 203                                                 MODULES

   MAIN
CONTENT

CONTENTS                                                     PAGE

Module 1

Unit 1    Nature and concept of Cooperative Legislation
Unit 2    Historical Antecedents of cooperative legislation
          in Nigeria
Unit 3    Cooperative Legislation, Practice and Procedure
Unit 4    The Registrar of Cooperatives
Unit 5    Nature of and Provisions in the Regulations/
          Rules of Co-operative Societies
Unit 6    Sources of Cooperative Laws in Nigeria

Module 2

Unit 1    Registration of Cooperative
Unit 2    Functions of Boards of Director in a
          Co-operative Organization
Unit 3    Nature of General Meetings in a Co-operative
          Society
Unit 4    Nature of a Management Committee in a
          Co-operative Society
Unit 5    Roles of Management Committee
Unit 6    Composition of a Management Committee

Module 3

Unit 1    Functions of the Officials of Management
          Committee
Unit 2    Delegation of Management Committee
          Functions
Unit 3    Audit Inspection and enquiry committee
Unit 4    Procedures for Auditors appointment
Unit 5    Functions and Powers of Auditors
Unit 6    Inquiry and inspection of co-operatives

Module 4

Unit 1    Distribution and uses of Net Surplus in a
          Co-operative Society

                                                                   i
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Unit 2   Dividend Payment and Interest on Shares
         of Co-operative Societies
Unit 3   Liquidation of Registered Society
Unit 4   Appointment of a Liquidator and Powers
         of a Liquidator
Unit 5   Arbitration and Cooperative Society
Unit 6   Public Accountability

ii
CRD 203   MODULES

MODULE 1

Unit 1   Nature and concept of Cooperative Legislation
Unit 2   Historical Antecedents of cooperative legislation in
         Nigeria
Unit 3   Cooperative Legislation, Practice and Procedure
Unit 4   The Registrar of Cooperatives
Unit 5   Nature of and Provisions in the Regulations/Rules of Co-
         operative Societies
Unit 6   Sources of Cooperative Laws in Nigeria

UNIT 1 NATURE AND CONCEPT OF COOPERATIVE
               LEGISLATION

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Nature and concept of Cooperative Legislation
        3.2 Meaning of Cooperative Legislation
        3.3 Cooperative by law
        3.4 Principal Legislation
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The quality and composition of the Management Committees that are
charged with the administration of these co-operative societies are
equally important to the stakeholders as their success depends on the
ways and manners they are managed through the laid down procedure,
rules and regulations and adhere strictly to due process. The need for
proper monitoring and evaluation of the financial transactions and
business activities of the societies must be stressed at all times. The
formation of co-operative societies is not an end in itself but rather a
means to an end. Members of the societies should be able to derive
certain benefits that are capable of improving the quality of their lives.
Good performance of the societies will make members have continued
confidence in the activities and leadership of the societies. Members
should also be sure that their money/share contributions are safe and are
available for use when needed. In the light of this therefore, it is

                                                                                                      1
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

necessary to, from time to time; assess the performance of the co-
operative societies by examining their level of compliance with legal
provisions that set them up. There is the need to clarify on these and
many more.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, learners should be able to:

 discuss nature and concept of cooperative legislation
 know the meaning of cooperative legislation
 examine the cooperative by law
 describe Principal Legislation

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Nature and concept of Cooperative Legislation

The unique nature of cooperative business has been recognized by
government in different parts of the world and this had necessitated the
promulgation of laws unique to it to guide its operation. The world
"law" has been defined in various ways by different legal writers but for
the purpose of our study we may consider any of these simple
definitions. "Law is a body of rules, whether processing from formal
enactment or from custom, which a particular state or community
recognizes as binding on its subjects or members". These rules are
recognized and acted upon by courts of justice. Again "law consists of a
large number of citizens of a particular state or country". Most laws are
based on customs that have evolved over time and proved to be good
standards of behavior. It took Great Britain almost two centuries to
evolve the cooperative laws under the industrial and provident societies
act (Stanleys Act) of 1852 and amended in1862. In Nigeria we have
been operating within the fundamental provision of cooperative
societys ordinance Act number 6 of 1935 with each region, later states
adopting sections to suit their own particulars. It was only in 1993 that
we tried to have our first indigenous cooperative laws in form of decree
and the states were allowed under section 56 of the decree to provide
regulations that will give flesh to the decree. Section 35 of the
constitution of Federal Republic of Nigeria 1999, has converted the
decree to an act of National Assembly making it operational in a
democratic set up.

2
CRD 203  MODULES

3.2 Meaning of Cooperative Legislation

By cooperative legislation, we mean the principal and subsidiary
legislature drawn from the cooperative principles of the different powers
given them in the law or available to the relevant government
department in cooperative administration.

It provides the details through which all the general provisions of the
principal legislation can be pursuit and realized. Thus, the principal
legislation cannot be used consistently and effectively without the
subsidiary legislation. It contains provisions on power of the general
meeting, committees, officers, division of surplus, Annual Supervision
Fees (ASF) annual accounts and returns, loan administration, members
welfare and employees.

So far enacted in the country include the cooperative regulations of 1936
meant to service the cooperative societys ordinance of 1935, the
different regional cooperative rules (regulations in Northern Nigeria)
and the cooperative regulation of the different states meant to service the
Decree of 1993 (e.g. the Cooperative regulation of the south eastern
states, Nigeria of 2000).

Rules/regulations are made by a government minister or commissioner
in charge of operations by using power given to them by law in section
56 of the Nigeria cooperative societies, Act of 1993; they are binding on
all cooperatives to which they refer. The minister or commissioner can
authorize changes more quickly than the legislation. So, matters which
need frequent changes should be contained in the regulation.

The regulations strictly regulate the internal organizations or internal
matters of cooperatives as well as the procedural matters on the
provisions of the laws and made to regulate the internal administration
and external relationships of various types of cooperative societies in a
country. It sees also enable the cooperative members to adopt such
practices which are suitable for attainment of their objectives using the
principles. In most of the developing countries (Nigeria inclusive),
cooperative legislation is made up of all the laws, ordinances, Acts,
Decrees, Edits, Rules, Regulations as well as the by-laws of respective
cooperative societies currently in force in a particular country.

The law, act or decree is passed by legislators or the supreme law
making body of a country. It contains the main provisions of the law
which are important that, the legislation should decide them after debate.

         3
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.3 Principal Legislation

By principle legislation, we mean those legal enactments made by the
law makers of the country toward cooperative administration. These
include cooperative ordinance, cooperative laws, cooperative acts or
cooperative decrees. Principal legislation in Nigeria cooperatives refers
to those cooperative laws that have been in force in Nigeria. First among
them is the cooperative societies ordinance of 1935; which formed the
Western, Eastern and Northern Nigeria cooperative societys law of
1953 and 1956 which were regional laws and the current 1993 Nigeria
cooperative societies decree.

Cooperatives, like any other type of enterprise, can only thrive in the
legal environment that facilitates their functioning. As an association of
persons as well as a business enterprise, it is expedient to create a
special legal framework for it, thus taking care of such issues, which the
usual company laws do not consider relevant.

Principal legislation deals with such issues as the appointment of
director (registrar) and registration of cooperative societies; duties and
privileges, as well as property and funds of registered societies; right
and liabilities of members. However, it also deals with disputes and
settlements, inspection and inquiries. It equally deals with dissolutions
of societies, surcharge and attachment as well as division and
amalgamation. It deals also with power to make regulations,
exemptions, miscellaneous and interpretations.

Although the Decree did not very much deviate conceptually, in spirit
and letter from the regional cooperative laws, there are however, some
innovations which, standing alone, tend to a great extent, toward de-
officialization and modernization of the cooperative law. In all, there are
about twenty-six (26) provisions (sections and sub-sections) which are
innovations, mainly progressive, but this one takes the totally of the
decree. They are not as significant as one would wish for at his time in
the countrys socio-economic development process.

3.4 Subsidiary legislation

By subsidiary legislation, we mean those legal enactments that were not
made by law makers themselves but by delegated authority. The
principal legislation will delegate authority to a person, officer or body
to make them. They are therefore subsidiary to the principal legislation.

4
CRD 203  MODULES

3.5 Cooperative Regulations/Rules

This section refers to those regulations and rules which have subsidiary
to the principal legislature (the cooperative law). The regulation usually
spells out the step by step approach members can stake in the
cooperative exercise.

3.6 Cooperative By-laws

The Nigerian Cooperative Decree of 1993 now referred to as
cooperative act of 2004, section II (1) authorizes a registered
cooperative society to make by laws for such things as are necessary or
desirable for the purpose for which the society is established.

Cooperative, as social and economic organization, needs to regulate the
relationship among members and the operations of their business
enterprise. Because of this, the members will voluntarily adopt a set of
agreements in order to define their relations with one another within the
association, their relations with the common undertaking, their rights
and duties etc. they are equivalent of the articles and memorandum of
association in joint stock companies. The by-laws can be seen to be the
step by step application of the subsidiary legislation to specific
cooperative organization.

Also the director of the cooperatives requires the registrar of every
society to submit a set of their proposed by-laws alongside their
application for registration to him for vetting and approval. All future
amendments of the by-laws are also approved by him before they take
effect. The by-laws contain the chosen name of the cooperative society,
their registered address, interpretations, areas of operation, objectives,
source of funds, use of funds, general meetings, powers, entrance fees,
minimum qualification for membership, withdrawal and termination of
membership, composition of the management committee, liability of
members, share capital, minimum thrift savings, types of business with
details, loan transactions, fines and penalties for wrong doings, organs of
the society, qualification and disqualification of committee membership,
officers of the society and their function, removal of officer from office,
procedure for meetings, affiliation and integration, registers, book and
records to be maintained, disposal of surplus resolution of disputes,
liquidation and amendments.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In concluding, cooperative laws, rules, regulations and by-laws are used
to maintain smooth and legal activities within the cooperative societies.

         5
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we discussed Nature and concept of Cooperative
Legislation, Meaning of Cooperative Legislation, Cooperative by law
and Principal Legislation.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss Nature and concept of Cooperative Legislation
2. Define Cooperative Legislation
3. Describe Principal Legislation

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Aminu Lawal Barau (2013). Introduction to Cooperative Legislation.
        Cyberspace superior international.

6
CRD 203                                               MODULES

UNIT 2 HISTORICAL  ANTECEDENTS                        OF

          COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION IN NIGERIA

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Historical Antecedents of cooperative legislation in
                Nigeria

        3.2 Pre independents
        3.3 Post independents
        3.4 The comparison of Cooperative legislation and various

                components
        3.5 The complimentary of the laws and regulations/rules
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

In this unit we shall focus on Historical Antecedents of cooperative
legislation in Nigeria, Pre independents, Post independents, the
comparison of Cooperative legislation and various components and the
complimentary of the laws and regulations/rules

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, learners should be able to:

 discuss the historical Antecedents of cooperative legislation in
        Nigeria

 describe Pre independents
 explain Post independents
 differentiate the comparison of Cooperative legislation and

        various components
 identify the complimentary of the laws and regulations/rules

                                                      7
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Historical Antecedents of Cooperative Legislature

Historical Antecedents of Cooperative Legislation in Nigeria

The same power as found in the earlier cooperative laws in India,
Ceylon, gold coast (Ghana) etc. were transferred to the Nigeria registrar
of cooperatives societies in the 1935 ordinance and subsequent thereof
Nigeria cooperative were therefore from day one formally officialized.

There wide powers of the registrar were envisaged in the report of F.A.
Strickland who though that the "registrar and his staff must take the
initiative and exercise control over the movement in a degree quite
unsuitable to the conditions of an advanced and education population.
Even if Strickland had not recommended these wide powers, the
government white paper would have provided for them since the
colonial government was obviously following a common policy in its
Afro-Asian colonies. The 1935 ordinance was a national law and
applicable to the then British trust territory of the Cameroons. In 1946,
the British colonial office published a model cooperative societies
rules/regulation and suit them to the various colonial governments to
serve as guidelines for future cooperative legislation.

3.2 Pre-independents

The first cooperative law in Nigeria was passed in 1935 as the
cooperative societies ordinance No 39 while the rules followed in 1936.
Both applied to the whole country, the colony and protectorate of
Nigeria. The law was assented for the first time by the king of England.
This law was largely modeled on the India act of 1912. It was first
amended in 1938 and again in1945, and completely revised in 1948 to
conform with the British secretary of states circular dispatched in 1946,
which laid the framework for the cooperative laws of all the British
territories.

In 1952, the country was divided into three (3) regions, the North, the
East and West. Cooperative was made a regional subject. East region
had to enact its own cooperative law; the Western regional cooperative
law came first in 1953, followed by the North and the East in 1956. The
Federal territory of Lagos made its own law in 1958.

8
CRD 203  MODULES

3.3 Post-independents

The mid-western region created in 1963, adopted the Western
cooperative law. When states were created from 1967 onwards, each
state adopted the pre-existing law of its region with minor modifications.
When Lagos took over the responsibilities of cooperative matters, for
Lagos, it adopted the 1958 law formerly applicable to the Federal
territory of Lagos leaving a state of vacuum at the federal level. The
views of conference of registrars of cooperative societies and the
movement were considered by the conference of commissioners
responsible for cooperative matters throughout the federation. They
recommended the established of cooperative divisions at the federal
level if the pace of cooperative development in the country was to be
accelerated to meet the aspiration of the federal government and the
yearnings of the movement. In February 1974, the cooperative
development decree No5 was promulgated for the establishment of a
cooperative development division. In the federal ministry of labour the
decree also empowered the appointment of a federal registrar of
cooperative societies and his supporting staff.

In 1976, the cooperative and social development (transfer of functions)
decree No.28 of 1976, effective 1st July 1976, was promulgated,
transferring the functions of the cooperative development division from
the federal ministry of labour into the newly created federal ministry of
cooperative and supply section (2) C of the decree No 5 of 1976 to
include "registration" and "supervision" of national cooperative
societies as a result of rapid economic and social development in the
country pertaining to cooperative and the need for the establishment of
cooperative societies with national character.

In August 1977, the federal commissioner for cooperative and supply,
Alhaji Umar A. Mutallab, set up a panel to review and unify Nigeria
cooperative societies laws and regulation with J.T Caxton Idowu as
chairman. The panel made use of existing laws (state laws and decree of
1974) as a model in promulgating the Nigeria cooperative societies
decree No 90 of 1993.

However, this can only be put into use as part of the decree 56 (1)
empowers the minister or the commissioner responsible for matters
relating to cooperative societies to make all such regulations as may be
necessary for the purpose of carrying out or giving effect to the
provisions of the decree. It was at this point that General Ibrahim
Babangida, at the tail end of his military rule decided to sign a draft into
a decree, No 90 of 1993. Being a federal law, it automatically
superseded all other laws for cooperative societies in Nigeria:

         9
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Meanwhile, in a joint conference of directors of cooperation, presidents
and secretaries of cooperative federations in the South-East of Nigeria
held in Enugu in 1997, it was resolved to fashion out common
"regulation" or the geopolitical zone. This came into effect in the year
2000.

3.4 The comparison of Cooperative Legislation and Various
       Components

3.4.1 DISTINCTION AMOG

A. The "Cooperative Law"
B. The "Cooperative Societies Regulation or Rules"
C. By-Laws "Articles of Association
D. Other Relevant Laws

Cooperative laws are laws which give legal recognition to cooperatives
and regulate their activities. Cooperative laws deals with the business
interest of person, who as members of the societies have business and
legal relationship with each other through the cooperative and the
interest of any other person (natural or artificial) who has legal and
business relationship with the cooperative through its servant and legal
representatives.

On the other hand, rules/regulations are subsidiary legislation for the
purpose of carrying out or giving effect to the principles and provisions
of the law. It is to provide in detail certain matters which the law itself
searches on the surface and lay down the procedure on certain issues.

Cooperative by-laws is the application and translation of the subsidiary
to a specific cooperative society. The by-laws must reflect the general
spirit of the cooperative law, with certain provisions of law finding their
application in them.

3.5 The Complimentary of the Laws and Regulations/Rules

The Nigerian Cooperative Societies Decree (NCSD) has provisions on
disputes and arbitration, the law only defines arbitration, lists the
possible, causes of, and parties to dispute arbitration and provides for
appeals thereof, the law does not rule in detail the actual procedure for
arbitration. Nevertheless, the rule on the other hand, specifically and in
detail, tells us:

    a) Who can apply for arbitration to the registrar

10
CRD 203  MODULES

    b) The mode of application for the declaration of dispute to the
        registrar

    c) The prohibition of legal practitioner to be involved in the
        cooperative disputes.

    d) The number of appointment of arbitration
    e) The appointment of chairman of the arbitration panel
    f) The proceeding of the arbitration
    g) How to go about an appeal, awards, arbitration etc.

4.0 CONCLUSION

The history of cooperative in Nigeria is an eye opener because there is a
saying which says "in order to have a perfect understanding of
something it is necessary to check history" so for a cooperative society
to have a solid foundation it is necessary to check the history of
cooperative within the geographical location.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit we discussed the historical Antecedents of cooperative
legislation in Nigeria, Pre-independents, Post independent, the
comparison of Cooperative legislation and various components and we
also identified the complimentary of the laws and regulations/rules

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss the historical Antecedents of cooperative legislation in
        Nigeria briefly

2. Describe Pre independents
3. Explain Post independents

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Aminu Lawal Barau (2013). Introduction to Cooperative Legislation.
        Cyberspace superior international.

         11
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 3 COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION, PRACTICE
               AND PROCEDURE

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Differences between Direction, Supervision & Control and
                Execution

        3.2 Functions of Legislature
                3.2.1 Determination of the Activities to be Undertaken
                3.2.2 Determination of Organisation
                3.2.3 Determination of Personnel
                3.2.4 Determination of Rules of Procedure
                3.2.5 Determination of Grant of Funds
                3.2.6 Legislative Supervision

4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The several branches into which the problem of administration is
divided, that having to do with general administration i.e. the
Legislature, is the most important one. In modern times, the legislature
as the representative body of the people has become the source of all
authority regarding administration. It means that the prime responsibility
and authority of making fundamental decisions in respect to location and
exercise of the general functions of direction, supervision and control of
administration rests with the legislature. The direction, supervision and
control are the functions of the legislature. It need hardly be said that the
efficient exercise of these functions is the problem of general
administration. It consists of determining where the responsibility for
the exercise of these functions shall be vested and the means that shall
be employed by the agency or agencies to which it is entrusted.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 identify the differences between direction, supervision & control
        and execution;

 list and explain the functions of legislature.

12
CRD 203  MODULES

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Differences between Direction, Supervision & Control
       and Execution

The function of direction, supervision and control differs from the
functions of execution. The word execution means the actual carrying
out of the orders. It simply consists of putting into execution what has
been ordered. This distinction between direction, supervision and
control on the one hand and execution on the other, is of vital
importance because as said above the former is the function of
legislature while the latter is the function of executive. A distinction
here should also be made between executive power and administrative
power. Generally, the two words ,,executive and ,,administrative are
interchangeably used but this is wrong. To put it in the words of
Willoughby, "The executive power, or rather function is that of
representing the government as a whole and of seeing that all of its laws
are properly complied with by its several parts. The administrative
function is that of actually administering the law as declared by the
legislative, and interpreted by the judicial branch of the government.
This distinction is usually made by declaring the executive function to
be essentially political in character, that is one involving the exercise of
judgment in its use; and the administrative function to be as concerned
with the putting into effect of policies and carrying out of orders as
determined or given by other organs".

In small undertakings, these distinctions are not of much importance
because here it is quite possible for the same person to exercise both the
functions of direction, supervision and control and also execution. In all
large undertakings, however, the distinction is of great importance
because here the two functions are not only to be clearly distinguished
but their performance also must be vested in different bodies. In
business concerns, the Board of Directors elected by shareholders
performs the first function. It frames rules and regulations, plans the
project and organizes its functions. The Board of Directors have an
important place in business establishments. Its instructions are followed
by its officials and every major step is taken on the direction. Their
order is the law for the officials of the establishments. Since the
legislature in public administration performs the same functions as are
performed by the Board of Directors in a business establishment,
therefore, the Legislature is called the Board of Directors. The Chief
Executive is called General Manager because his functions are similar to
the functions performed by a General Manager of a private undertaking.

         13
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.2 Functions of Legislature

The Legislature sitting as a board of directors performs numerous
functions. Firstly, it determines the activities to be undertaken. Secondly,
it has to decide the nature of organisation necessary for carrying out the
activities. Thirdly, it has to determine the personnel that would be
required for the organisation. Fourthly, it determines the rules of
procedure to be employed by the organisation. Fifthly, it provides for
funds, which it shall make available to the organisation for carrying out
the activities. Sixthly, it has to design a system for supervising and
controlling the organisation so that the work may be done efficiently. A
brief description of each of these functions is given below.

3.2.1 Determination of the Activities to be Undertaken

As regards the first function, there can be little doubt that the
determination of what the government shall do is a responsibility that
rests upon the legislature. The policy to be adopted by the government
both in the internal and external field is set out by the legislature. But it
does not mean that it should lay down all the details of a policy, the
specific acts which shall be performed in carrying out the policy. Better
it would be if it prescribes the policy in general terms and leaves the
details to the executive. To illustrate, it may lay down that compulsory
primary education should be enforced in the country, but it should not
go to the length of prescribing the places where schools will be
established. It should leave that judgement to the executive. The
legislature is a body of politicians representing particular territories or
interests. They are interested primarily in their particular territories. The
executive represents and is interested in the entire territory and
government of the State. Its judgement is bound to be better in regard to
details than that of the legislature because the former being in close
touch with administration is in a better position to understand its needs.
Moreover, the legislature will into be unnecessarily burdened with the
task of specifying the details. If the legislature goes into details, it denies
the initiative to the executive and thereby may impair the efficiency of
administration. Too great legislature itemization renders it impossible
for the chief executive to make the most effective utilization of the
organisation and personnel and to meet exigencies that are only fully
developed during the progress of the work. The legislature should feel
contented with the determination of the general programme and should
be interested in its efficient execution. Beyond this, it should proceed
conservatively, and its further specification should be directory rather
than mandatory upon the chief executive.

14
CRD 203  MODULES

3.2.2 Determination of Organisation

"Organisation is the medium through which individuals work as a group
as effectively as each would work alone. It consists of the relationships
of individuals and of groups to groups, which are so related as to bring
about an orderly division of labour". Generally speaking, organisation is
divided into departments, business units, divisions and sections. In
addition to these units there are certain units called field stations. These
field stations are created in the services where the work of the service is
done not only at the headquarters of the government but also in field
stations all over the country, e.g. post offices, railway stations, law
courts, etc. Now the question here at issue is the point at which it is
advisable that the legislature should stop in determining not only the
departments but shall be created for the performance of administrative
duties, but also the internal organisations of these departments.
Concretely, in the words of Willoughby the problem is,
"Shall the legislature leave the whole matter of organisation to the chief
executive as general manager? Shall it determine organisation, in so far
as the primary units of organisation, the departments, independent
boards or commissions, etc., are concerned, leaving it to such bodies
acting under the general control of the chief executive to provide for the
character of internal organisation of those services? Or shall it push its
determination still further so as definitely to prescribe by law, not only
the departmental and bureau organisation, but also the sub-division of
these divisions, and the final working units, the sections and field
stations?"

In practice, there is no uniformity among the various States on this
point. In U.S.A., the numbers of character of the administrative
departments that shall be set up for the handling of departments are
created by the Executive decree. In India, the power of establishing new
departments rests with the President acting through the Prime Minister.
In so far as the units of the lower order, i.e., divisions, sections and field
stations are concerned, the discretion in India is left in the hands of the
ministers acting through their heads of departments. But in all these
countries, the legislature has from time to time created new agencies in
the form of departments, corporations, boards or commissions to carry
on a particular activity. Thus in India, the Life Insurance Corporation,
Railway Board, the State Electricity Board, Public Service Commission
have been created by the legislature. That in doing so it has been guided
largely by the advice of its general manager, the chief executive, is quite
true, but the act of determination has been the act of the legislature and
these agencies have a legislative status in the sense that their existence
has been determined by statutory law. In Nigeria, the power for
establishing new department is vested in the legislature. Also, in

         15
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Nigeria, cooperative societies have been brought into existence by Act
of Parliament.

As to what should be the true principle, it may be said that it is desirable
that the legislature should content itself with making only the most
general provision regarding the organisation of an agency and leave the
details of internal organisation to be determined by the chief executive
because he is the person who is responsible for running the
administration. The legislature cannot handle this matter in as intelligent
a manner as those directly responsible for the conduct of the affairs.
Secondly, if legislature determines the organisation it gives rigidity to it.
Thirdly, it imposes upon an already overburdened legislature the
responsibilities of which it should be relieved. Therefore, the chief
executive should be given the necessary powers to shape the
administrative units according to the requirements of administration.

3.2.3 Determination of Personnel

Personnel are the body of persons who actually run the administration. It
may be of two types ­ directing personnel, that is, those who are
responsible for direction of services and are commonly called officers,
and employees proper, that is, those occupying subordinate positions
and having as their general duties the carrying out of orders given to
them. It is generally accepted with regard to the former class that the
legislature should itself determine their "number, character,
compensation, powers and duties". In respect of this class the only
question is how deep into the organisation of the several services this
determination shall go. Now all the arguments that have been given
against the legislature seeking to control organisation under the
preceding subheading also equally apply to the creation by law of
officers to have charge of subordinate units of organisation.
As regards the second class of employees, the legislature may determine
their conditions of service either by a general statute or by an act of
appropriation. Willoughby is of the opinion that it is not wise to control
personnel other than directing personnel, by the first method. Any
attempt to prescribe limitations upon subordinate personnel in this
manner gives rise to a rigidity that is sure in many cases to work injury.
The Act which provides for the setting up of a service, after providing
for the directing personnel may provide "for such other officers and
employees as may be from time to time provided by law". This will
leave sufficient discretion to the legislature to determine each year the
provision that shall be made for the subordinate personnel of a service at
the time of granting appropriations for that service.

16
CRD 203  MODULES

3.2.4 Determination of Rules of Procedure

Rules of procedure may be of two types: (1) Those which affect the
interests or rights outside of service; and (2) those which have to do with
purely administrative operations within the service. The example of the
former is the rules setting forth the procedure to be followed in assessing
and collecting income-tax or land revenue, in the grant of copyrights,
trademarks, etc. These are matters affecting personal and property rights
of the people in a most direct manner. The examples of the latter are the
rules for the disbursement of pay to the members of the service. Now as
regards the former it is desirable that the legislature should pass a statute
to give them legal sanction. The question as to whether these rules
should be embodied in the Acts of the legislature or promulgated by
cabinet or the head of the department involves a consideration of the
question of the delegation of legislative powers which lies outside the
scope of our study. The advantage of having these rules embodied in the
statutes lies in the fact that they are drafted by the persons directly
familiar with the conditions and problems of the department.

As regards the second category of rules of procedure, it is better to leave
wide discretion to the services concerned. The legislature should
exercise control over them through a proper system of accounts, reports,
audit and the like.

3.2.5 Determination of Grant of Funds

In all the countries the legislature determines the amount of money
which is to be made available for expenditure to the executive. All the
public services are to be paid from public funds for their work. If no
money is made available, the entire administration would come to a
standstill. Therefore, it is the duty of the legislature to find out the needs
of every department and make provision of money accordingly.

3.2.6 Legislative Supervision

Since the legislature is the source of all administrative authority and
makes money available for carrying out the administration it is desirable
that all grants of authority should be accompanied by means for ensuring
that such grants are properly exercised. In other words, it may be said
that the legislature should provide the means by which it shall be able to
exercise due supervision and control over its agents. To see that these
agents perform their duties properly is an imperative duty of the
legislature.

Willoughby mentions the following means through which supervision
and control may be exercised and accountability enforced:

         17
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

(i) the requirement that all administrative officers shall keep proper
        records of their official acts;

(ii) the requirement that these officers shall submit reports at least
        once a year giving an account of their act;

(iii) the requirement that accurate accounts shall be kept of all
        financial transactions and reports of such transactions shall be
        made in such form that full information regarding their character
        is furnished;

(iv) provision for a system of examination and audit of these
        accounts;

(v) provision for the consideration by the legislative bodies, acting
        directly or indirectly, the administrative and financial reports with
        a view to determining not merely the legality of the action taken,
        but also the efficiency and economy with which official duties
        have been informed;

(vi) the requirement that administrative officers shall furnish
        information regarding acts done by them when called upon to do
        so by the legislature;

(vii) provision for special investigations or inquiries of a
        comprehensive character of the manner in which affairs have
        been conducted by a particular service or services.

Thus, from the above description, it is clear that the legislature instead
of directly running the administration or determining in too detailed a
manner the activities, agencies, organisation, plant and personnel should
give its directions in general terms and provide that the officers charged
with their execution shall furnish it with detailed data regarding their
action. It is of greatest importance that the system of accounting,
reporting and audit that will correctly and fully furnish the legislature
with precise information regarding the acts of all administrative officers
should be made perfect. In the words of John Stuart Mill.

"Instead of the function of governing which it is radically unfit for, the
proper of office of a representative assembly is to watch and control the
governance; to throw the light of publicity on its acts; to compel a full
exposition and justification of all of them which anyone considers
questionable; to censure them if found condemnable, and, if the men
who compose the government abuse their trust, or fulfill it in a manner
which conflicts with the deliberate sense of the nation, to expel them
from office, and either expressly or virtually appoint their successors".

4.0 CONCLUSION

In concluding, it should be noted that the prime responsibility and
authority of making fundamental decisions in respect to location and

18
CRD 203  MODULES

exercise of the general functions of direction, supervision and control of
administration rests with the legislature.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we have identified and discussed the differences between
direction, supervision & control and execution. We have also listed and
explained the functions of legislature.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Itemize and discuss the functions of legislature in the direction,
supervision and control of establishments.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Dr. VishNood Bhagwan, Vidya Bhushan (2009). Public Administration.
        S. Chand and Co. Limited, pp. 66 ­ 70.

         19
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 4 THE REGISTRAR OF COOPERATIVES

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 The Registrar of Cooperatives
        3.2 Registers
        3.3 Returns to the Registrar of Cooperatives
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment
7.0 References and Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

This unit will discuss about the Registrar of Cooperatives, Registers and
Returns to the Registrar of Cooperatives.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 describe cooperative registry and the dti
 state the registers in a registered society;
 list the returns to be submitted to the registrar of cooperatives

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 The Registrar of Cooperative Societies and
       His/Her Function ­ Statutory and Non-Statutory

The Registrar: The Provincial Government] may appoint a person to be
Registrar of Co-operative Societies for the Province] or any portion of it,
and may appoint a person or persons to assist such Registrar, and may, by
general or special order, confer on any such person or persons all or any
of the powers of a Registrar under this Act.

Power of Registrar to issue search warrant ­ For the purpose of
recovering any papers, documents or books of account belonging to a
society, the Registrar may issue a search warrant and exercise all such
powers with respect thereto as may be lawfully exercised by a
Magistrate under the Provisions of Chapter VII of the Code of Criminal

20
CRD 203  MODULES

Procedure, 1898, and all such searches shall be made in accordance with
the Provisions of that Code.

The powers under sub-section (1) shall not be exercised by the Registrar
before serving a notice on the society and giving it a reasonable
opportunity to produce such papers, documents or books of account as
are specified in such notice.

In addition to recording transactions, a company registrar must also keep
registers of certain aspects of its constitution. Again, these requirements
are designed to facilitate publicity and to regulate conduct of the
company affairs.

To make inspection of the registrar reasonably easy for persons who are
entitled to have access to them, the company must keep them at
specified places and, in order to remove difficulties that arose in the past
over inspection, the Companies Act 1989 inserts s. 723A into the 1985
Act removing many of the previous details which were provided, and
giving the Secretary of State wide powers to make discretionary rules by
statutory instrument.

The statutory registers (with the relevant sections) are:

 the register of members;
 the register of members interests in shares and debentures of the

        company;
 the register of charges;
 minutes of general meetings of the society;
 the register of written resolutions.

The requirements as to the form in which accounting records are kept
also apply to the registered society. Societies with debentures issued
nearly always keep a register of debenture-holders, but there is no
statutory compulsion to do so (despite recommendations that there
should be) should be kept at the Cooperative Office.

3.1.1 Register of Members

The detailed procedure surrounding the register of members is dealt with
in the cooperative bye-law. This is because entry in the register of
members is the fundamental means by which a person becomes a
member of a registered society.

         21
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.1.2 Register of Charges

The register of charges is also dealt with elsewhere, in the chapter on
loan capital. The register must contain details of charges affecting the
company property or undertaking, and should provide brief descriptions
of property charged, the amount of the charge and the name of the
person entitled to the charge. An officer who details with respect to this
register is liable to a fine. Any person may inspect the charges register;
members and creditors may inspect free of charge.

In addition to keeping a register of charges, a company must also keep
copies of every instrument creating a charge at its registered office: s.
411. Any member or creditor may inspect the copies and register
without a fee; others may inspect the register for such a fee as may be
prescribed. Refusal of these rights may lead to a fine and the court has a
right to compel inspection or to direct that a copy be sent: s. 412.

3.2 Returns to the Registrar of Companies

Returns must be made to the Director of Cooperatives by a registered
society.

Throughout this text it is evident that the Registrar of Companies must
be informed of many other occurrences, such as alteration of the
company articles.

4.0 CONCLUSION

A number of statutory requirements have been examined, all of which
are designed to ensure that corporate bodies (especially limited liability
companies) are open to public enquiry where this is in the public
interest. This is achieved primarily by the requirement to notify the
Registrar of certain important transactions; and the requirement to file
with the Registrar annual audited accounts and the annual returns.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we have discussed:

 the registers in a registered society;
 returns to be submitted to the Registrar of Cooperatives;
 the position of auditor in a registered society.

22
CRD 203  MODULES

6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Briefly define and describe accountability as it relates to a
        registered society.

2. List and explain the contents of accounting records of a registered
        society.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers.
        Cooperative Society Decree 90 of 1993.

Nigeria Law Digest (2006). Lexis Nexis Publishers.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates.

         23
CRD 203           COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 5    NATURE OF AND PROVISIONS IN THE
          REGULATIONS/RULES OF CO-OPERATIVE
          SOCIETIES

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Registration of co-operative societies
        3.2 Privileges of Registered societies
        3.3 Rights and Liabilities of Co-operative members
        3.4 Duties of co-operative societies
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The activities of the co-operative societies need to be properly guided
and monitored to ensure that the set objectives are achieved. Usually, the
regulations/rules guiding the activities of these societies are clearly
stated in the societies bye-laws. These bye-laws (often referred to as the
societies constitutions) are normally documented and copies given to
members at the point of entry into the society. Issues bordering on
registration of members, ownership structure, business activities, general
meetings, board membership, sanctions/fines, and resignation of
members, dividend payment, and shareholding capacities and so on are
stated in the regulations/rules of the societies. It is therefore considered
very important that members know the rules/regulations guiding the
activities of the co-operative societies so that members are duly
informed about the running of these societies. It is in the light of this
that the learners need to be put through some lessons on the nature of
and the provisions in the regulations/rules governing the conduct of co-
operative societies in Nigeria.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, learners should be able to:

 identify the regulations/rules guiding the activities of the co-
        operative societies;

 know the privileges of registered co-operative members;
 assess the rights and liabilities of co-operative society members as

         stipulated in the by-laws;

24
CRD 203  MODULES

 examine the duties of co-operative society members.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Registration of Co-operative Societies

According to the Co-operative Societies (Amended) Act (2004) in
Kenya, a society has the following as its objects:

a) The promotion of the welfare and economic interests of its
        members, and

b) Has incorporated in its by-laws the following co-operative
        principles:

        i) Voluntary and open membership
        ii) Democratic member control
        iii) Economic participation by members
        iv) Autonomy and independence
        v) Education, training and information
        vi) Co-operation among co-operatives, and
        vii) Concern for the community in general

A society, under this act, may be registered by the Commissioner as a
cooperative society with or without limited liability.

3.2 Privileges of Registered Societies

Upon registration, every society shall become a body corporate by the
name under which it is registered, with perpetual succession and a
common seal and with power to hold movable and immovable property
of every description to enter into contracts, to sue and be sued and to do
all things necessary for the purpose of, or in accordance with, its by ­
laws.

The by-laws of a co-operative society, shall when registered, bind the
society and the members thereof to the same extent as if they were
signed by each member and contained covenants on the part of each
member for himself and his personal representatives to observe all the
provisions of the by-laws.

3.3 Rights and Liabilities of Members

The rules and regulations guiding the activities of the members of the
cooperative societies are clearly stated the Act establishing such
societies.

         25
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

For instance, in accordance with provision of the Kenyas Co-operative
Societies Act (amended) 2004, some of the rights and limitations of
members are stated as follows:

i) A person, other than a co-operative society, shall not be qualified
        for membership of a co-operative society unless:-

        a) He has attained the age of eighteen years,
        b) His employment, occupation or profession falls within the

                category or description of those for which the co-operative
                society is formed; and
        c) He is resident within, or occupies land within, the
                societys area of operation as described in the relevant by-
                law
ii) No member, other than a co-operative society, shall hold more
        than one-fifth of the issued and paid-up share capital of any co-
        operative society
iii) No company incorporated or registered under the Companies Act,
        or no unincorporated body of persons shall be entitled to become
        a member of a cooperative society, except with a written
        authorization through a resolution by a general meeting of that
        co-operative society.
iv) No member of a co-operative society shall exercise any of the
        rights of a member unless he has made such payment to the
        society in respect of membership, or has acquired such interest in
        the society as may be prescribed under this Act or under the by-
        laws of the society
v) No person shall be a member of more than one co-operative
        society with unlimited liability and ,no person shall be a member
        of more than one cooperative society having the same or similar
        object; provided that a person who;
        i) is a member of a co-operative society ,and
        ii) carries on business on land or at premises outside the area
        of operation of that co-operative society; may be a member of a
        co-operative society in whose area of operation that land or those
        premises are situated, notwithstanding that its objects are the
        same as or similar those of the first-mentioned society
vi) Each member of a co-operative society shall have one vote only
        in the affairs of the society, irrespective of the number of shares
        he holds. Provided that a co-operative society which is a member
        of any registered society shall have as many votes as may be
        prescribed by the by-laws of the cooperative society of which it is
        a member, and may, subject to such by-laws, appoint any number
        of its committee members, not exceeding the number of such
        votes, to exercise its voting power.
vii) A member of a co-operative society shall have the right to:

26
CRD 203  MODULES

        a) Attend and participate in decision making at all general
                meetings of the society and vote;

        b) Be elected to organs of the society, subject to its by-laws;
        c) Enjoy the use of all facilities and services of the society

                subject to the societys by-laws;
        d) All legitimate information relating to the society,

                including: internal regulations, registers, minutes of
                general meetings, supervisory committee reports, annual
                accounts, inventories and investigation reports, at the
                societys head office
viii) A member of a co-operative society shall have the obligation to:
        a) Observe and comply with all the society by-laws and
                decisions taken by the relevant organs of the co-operative
                society in accordance with the by-laws of the society;
        b) Buy and pay up for shares or make any other payments
                provided for in the by-laws of the society;
        c) Meet the debts of the society in case of bankruptcy in
                accordance with the provisions of this Act and the by-laws
                of the society.

3.4 Duties of Co-operative societies

a) Every co-operative society shall have a registered address to
        which notices and communications may be sent and shall send to
        the Commissioner notice of every change of address within one
        month of the change.

b) Every co-operative society shall keep a copy of this Act and of
        the rules/regulations made there-under and of its own by-laws
        and a list of its members (excluding details of nominees and
        shareholdings) at its registered office and shall keep them open
        for inspection by any person, free of charge, at all reasonable
        times during business hours.

c) For each financial year, the committee of a co-operative society
        shall cause to be prepared estimates of the societys income and
        expenditure including recurrent and capital estimates for approval
        by the general meeting at least three months before the end of the
        preceding financial year.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, the learners have been put the various regulations/rules
guiding the conduct of co-operative societies in Nigeria. The relevance
of these regulations/rules to the attainment of the co-operative objectives
was properly discussed. The level of compliance of these societies with
the provisions of the regulations/rules was equally explained. It is hoped
that after this lesson learners will be properly informed about the nature

         27
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

of and the provisions of the regulations/rules as applied to co-operative
societies in Nigeria

5.0 SUMMARY

The nature of and provisions in the regulations/rules governing the
internal organization of co-operative societies has been explained.
Adequate information on the content of this unit is expected to provide
sufficient knowledge on the basic guidelines governing the conduct of
the co-operative societies in Nigeria.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Clearly explain the nature of and the provision of the regulations/rules
guiding the conduct of the internal organization of the co-operative
societies in Nigeria.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Adeyeye, S.O. (1978): The Co-operative Movement in Nigeria-
        Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow. Gottingen-Vandenhoech and
        Ruprecht.

Akinwumi, J.A.(1985):Mobilization of Rural Savings Through Co-
        operative Type (Self-Help) Institutions for Investment in Local
        Development (Africa).A case study of co-operative thrift and
        credit societies, the co-operative bank and the investment and
        trust society: ILO Research Report.

28
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 6 SOURCES OF COOPERATIVE LAWS IN
               NIGERIA

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Meaning of the term ,,Source
                3.1.1 Classes of Sources of Law
                3.1.2 Formal Source
                3.1.3 Material Source
                3.1.4 Authoritative and Binding Source
                3.1.5 Other Source

        3.2 Theories of Sources of Law
                3.2.1 Consensus Theory
                3.2.2 Conflict Theory
                3.2.3 Other Theory

        3.3 Autochthonism
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment
7.0 References and Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

We are beginning to look into the Sources of Law. It is perhaps
important to distinguish Sources of Laws from Sources of Law. When
we look at law as a series rather than as a system, we may refer to
Source of Law, which may include sources within and outside the law
properly so called.

In this unit, we are concerned with a legal system and our focus is on
legal Sources of Law. We shall look into some theories, some of which
appear to ally with Social Contract Theory or Marxism as the case may
be. Autochthonism will receive some attention so as to evaluate how
home grown or alien our Sources are and the essence, if any, of change.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of the unit, you should be able to:

 understand the meaning of terms used,
 enumerate the classes, and the theories of sources as well as

         29
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

 explain the autochthony of law.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Meaning of the term "Source"

The term "Source(s)" (also termed fons juris) may mean the origin and
authoritative statement from which the substance of the law is derived. It
may also be described as: "something (such as a Constitution, Treaty,
Statute, or Custom) that provides authority for legislation and for
judicial decisions. A source of law is the point of origin for law or legal
analysis.

You may have observed lawyers in Court, when they make statements
and refer the Court to particular decided cases, the Law Reports where
such cases can be found, to some Act or Statute and pointing to a
particular chapter, part or section. We say that the Law Reports and the
Statute or Act so cited are sources of his authoritative statements or law.
In literature of jurisprudence, the problem of "Source(s)" relates to the
question: Where does the Judge obtain the rules by which to decide
cases? In our present context: Where do we obtain the law we have been
talking about ­ the law constituted in the Nigerian Legal System?

In this sense of the sources of law, Fullers (cited in Elias (1963) listed
the following: statutes, judicial precedents, custom, the opinion of
experts, morality and equity. Fuller probably was concerned with
"Sources of Laws" rather than Sources of Law ­ where the law
generally draws not only its content, but also its force.

In the context of legal research, the term "Sources" connotes:

(i) the origin of legal concepts and ideas;
(ii) governmental institutions that formulate legal rules;
(iii) published manifestation of the law.

3.1.1 Classes of Sources of Law

Sources of Law may be classified into formal or material, and the latter
further subdivided into historical, legal, authoritative and binding, or
other sources.

3.1.2 Formal Source

 A formal source is what gives validity to the law.

30
CRD 203  MODULES

 Upon what authority is the National Open University of Nigeria
        established?

 Upon an Act of the National Assembly,
 Who gave the National Assembly authority to legislate?
 The Constitution,
 Where does the Constitution derive its power?
 The general will and power of the people of Nigeria.
 This is the Ultimate Source. Thus, the formal source of law may

        be traced to the "common consciousness" of the people, or the
        "Divine Will".

3.1.3 Material Source

Here, we are not concerned with the basis of validity as we did in our
discussion of "formal source" of law. We are concerned here with the
origin of the substance of the law ­ Where the law derives from or the
authoritative source from which the substance of the law has been
drawn. This may be:

(i) Historical

This may comprise the writings of lawyers, e.g. the rules and principles
of foreign law. The writings do not form part of the local law until they
are formally received or enacted into law. Prior thereto, they serve as
persuasive authority.

(ii) Legal

These are sources that are recognized as such by law itself. Examples
are Statutes, Judicial Precedents and Customary Law.

3.1.4 Authoritative and Binding Source

This refers to the origin of the legal rules and principles, which are being
enacted or formulated and regarded as authoritative and binding.
Examples are legislations (Received law and Local statutes), judicial
precedents (Common law and Equity; and local precedents) and
Customs (Customary law).

3.1.5 Other Source

These are non-formal sources or origin of legal rules that lack authority,
but are persuasive merely.

         31
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Professor Elias considered the "Source of Law" in terms of the
mainspring of its authority and classified this into six categories,
namely:

(i) Local Laws and custom;
(ii) English Common law, the doctrines of English Equity and

        Statutes of general applications in force in England on 1st
        January, 1900;
(iii) Local legislation, and the interpretations based thereupon;
(iv) Law Reports;
(v) Textbooks and Monographs on Nigerian Law;
(vi) Judicial Precedents.

There is no hard and fast rule on classification of Source. What is of
essence is knowing or identifying the sources themselves and the
theories that have been proffered.

3.2 Theories of Sources of Law

Legal writers have proffered sources of law, which may neatly be
discussed under three headings, namely:

(i) Consensus Theory
(ii) Conflict Theory
(iii) Other Theory (Middle Course)

3.2.1 Consensus Theory

This theory conceives of a legal system as a product of consensus idea
of society, functioning as an integrated structure, whose members agree
on the norms, rules, and values, which they have mutually and
voluntarily agreed should be uniformly respected.

In Nigeria, sovereignty and supremacy reside on people, not their ruler
and these people are represented by the members of the House of
Assembly, House of Representatives and the Senate, who make laws on
their behalf.

In the traditional chiefly and chiefless societies, the monarch and chiefs
declare what the law has always been from time immemorial, and where
they are in doubt, they consult The Quran, The Holy Bible, or the
Oracle.

32
CRD 203  MODULES

3.2.2 Conflict Theory

The conflict theory is to the effect that the society is made up of series of
conflicting and competing groups, and law and legal system is a dictate
of the wealthy and powerful in the society to perpetuate their positions
and class interests.

Whether the lawmakers are wealthy or go into lawmaking in order to
acquire wealth or get wealthier is arguable.

However, there is freedom of expression at the floor of the Houses and
immunity from liability from what goes on there. Dictates of wealth or
power, does not therefore appear real or apparent in passing of bills into
law.

3.2.3 Other Theory (Middle Course)

There is a middle course between Consensus theory and Conflict theory.
This middle of the road approach argues that Legal system is the
handiwork of those exercising political and legal powers of state, not
necessarily to protect their own class interests, but expressing the
definition of the privileged group, their values, notions and morals.

3.3 Autochthonism

Legal Theorists have raised further argument of how much of our laws
and their sources are autochthonous. Autochthonism or autochthony
pertains to the nativity of the law. That is to say, the extent to which the
law is or is not indigenous or native to the land in which it operates. Are
the sources of Nigerian law indigenous (autochthony) or foreign (alien)?
An autochthonous legislation, for example, may be one which does not
trace its validity to any foreign legislature; rather, it is home-grown and
rooted in the country itself. Autochthony has two aspects:

(i) Formal Autochthony: This relates to the "Source(s)" from
        which the law or the Court, derives its authority as law.

(ii) Substantive Autochthony: This refers to the contents of the
        legislation or law e.g. the frame of government which the
        Constitution has established.

Autochthony envisages

(i) a new birth, some kind of break in legal continuity;
(ii) enactment by virtue of an authority, native to it or inherent in the

        local enacting body.

         33
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Exponents of Africanism have extended these requisites to include
attempts to refashion their Constitution and to reflect authentically the
African traditional ideas of government and powers.

Researchers in cooperative legislation and law thinks that a break in
legal continuity is a perquisite to making a Constitution (or any law) if it
is to be credited with fully autochthonous source. The essence of the
break is to remove the semblance of having been made in any way under
authority of the Metropolitan power.

Professor Robsin has expressed a contrary view, emphasizing that what
is of much more importance is the continuous acceptance of the
Constitution (or law) by the people subject to it.

Let us examine the autochthony of our Constitution for an illustration:

The Preamble to the Independence Constitution, 1960 states:

"The Queens Most Excellent Majesty-in-Council, Her Majesty, by
virtue and in exercise of powers in that behalf by the Foreign
Jurisdiction Act, 1890 (a) or otherwise in Her Majesty vested, is pleased
by and with the advice of Her Privy Council, to order, and it is hereby
ordered as follows:

(i) "This order may be cited as the Nigeria (Constitution) Order in
        Council, 1960".

Upon Attainment of Independence, both Nigeria and the United
Kingdom renounced the metropolitan power to make laws for the new
Independent State of Nigeria which thereafter became vested with
powers, however limited to amend, replace, the Imposed Constitution
and other laws.

The Preamble for 1963 Constitution provides:

"Having firmly resolved to establish the federal Republic of Nigeria .....
We, the people of Nigeria, by our representatives here in Parliament
assembled, do hereby declare, enact and give to ourselves the following
Constitution ......

This Constitution, 1960 metamorphosed into the Federal Republic of
Nigeria (FRN) Constitutions 1963, 1979 and 1999 with some
amendments.

34
CRD 203  MODULES

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

1. Account for the autochthony of the Nigerian Constitution.
2. Compare the enactment of the Constitution of Nigeria and of

        Eire: What difference do you observe?

Let us consider some examples from other jurisdictions.

Dr. de Valeras government of Eire, 1937 prepared a draft Constitution,
and presented to the Parliament for approval, he submitted the draft
Constitution to the people in a plebiscite, which adopted it. Further
example can be found in Papua New Guinea.

4.0 CONCLUSION

You learnt the sources of law in Nigeria. You also learnt the meaning of
the term ,,Source, then its classification as well as the theories behind it
and the extent to which the classes are home-grown or alien.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we have tried to examine the term: "the sources of law"
rather than "sources of laws". The theories relating to sources range
from consensus to conflict and middle of the road approach. These have
been discussed. It is an open question whether the sources of our
Constitution and laws are autochthonous (home-grown) or alien.

Contemporary writers including Professor Nwabueze have contended
that the importance of legal autochthony relates more to the contents of
the law rather than the origin of the Constitution (or any law) or
substantive autochthony.

The argument for legal autochthony tends to excite nationalistic
sentiments and perhaps pride. Legal autochthony is not to be desired for
its own sake. Rather it is to be seen as a means of effecting changes in
the Constitution (or any law).

6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Give an account of the difficulties met with in attempting to formulate a
satisfactory classification of laws.

         35
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS

Elias, T.O. (1969). Law in a Developing Society. Being Inaugural
        Lecture delivered at the University of Lagos on 17 January on the
        topic "Nigerian Land Law and Custom".

Obilade, A.O. (1979). Nigerian Legal System. London: Sweet and
        Maxwell Publishers.

Oyakhiromen, I. (2009). The Nigerian Legal System. NOUN published
        course material.

36
CRD 203   MODULES

MODULE 2

Unit 1   Registration of Cooperative
Unit 2   Functions of Boards of Director in a Co-operative
         Organization
Unit 3   Nature of General Meetings in a Co-operative Society
Unit 4   Nature of a Management Committee in a Co-operative
         Society
Unit 5   Roles of Management Committee
Unit 6   Composition of a Management Committee

UNIT 1 REGISTRATION OF COOPERATIVE

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Appointment of Federal Director of Cooperative or State
        Director of Cooperative
        3.2 Qualification of Director
        3.3 Functions of a Director
        3.4 Cooperative Society ­ Definition

                3.4.1 Types of Cooperative Society
                3.4.2 Features of Cooperative Society
        3.5 Formation of a Cooperative Society
                3.5.1 Duties of Promoters of a Cooperative Society
        3.6 Registration of a Cooperative Society
        3.7 Conditions for Non-Registration of a Cooperative Society
        3.8 Consequence of Registration
        3.9 The Certificate of Registration
        3.10 Effects of Registration
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment
7.0 References and Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

In this unit, you will learn about the criteria for the appointment of a
Federal or State Director of Cooperatives and the qualification of the
Director. We shall also discuss the types of societies which may register
and the conditions for their registration with the cooperative society.

          37
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 know the criteria for the appointment of a federal or state director
        of cooperatives;

 highlight or state the qualifications required for a director to be
        appointed;

 list the discuss the types of societies that may register as
        cooperatives;

 enumerate the conditions for non-registration as cooperative
        societies;

 understand the effect of registration as a cooperative society.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Appointment of Federal Director of Cooperative or State
       Director of Cooperative

Section (1) of the Cooperative Societies Act of 1993 provides that: "The
President, Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces may:

(a) appoint a person to be a Federal Director of Cooperatives;
(b) appoint persons to assist him;
(c) by notice in the Gazette confer all or any of the powers of a

        Director under this Decree on any such person.

Subsection 2 of the Decree also stipulates that the Governor of a State
may appoint a person to be the Director of Cooperatives in the State and
may appoint persons to assist him and shall by or notice in the State
Gazette, confer on any such person all or any of the powers of a Director
under the Act.

3.2 Qualification of Director

To be qualified as a Director of Cooperatives, a person must possess the
following qualifications:

1. must be of sound mind;
2. must not be a bankrupt;
3. should not be an ex-convict.

3.3 Functions of a Director

The following are the functions of a Director Cooperative:

38
CRD 203  MODULES

(a) Regulation and Supervision of the registration and management,
        supervision and widening up of cooperative societies;

(b) The establishment and maintenance of cooperative societies;
(c) He arranges and conducts investigation into the affairs of any

        cooperative society registered by it;
(d) He performs other functions as may be specified by the

        Cooperative Societies Act of 1993;
(e) He undertakes any other activities as may be relevant to the

        execution of the provisions of the Act.

3.4 Cooperative Society: Definition

Cooperative society is an association of person who have voluntarily
joined together to achieve a common end and through the formation of
democratically controlled organisation, making equitable contributions
to the capital required and accepting a fair share of the risks and benefits
of the undertaking in which the members actively participate. Once
registered, a cooperative society becomes a legal person. A legal person
is an entity which the law regards as having rights and duties. Generally,
law recognizes two distinct categories of persons, namely:

(i) Natural person;
(ii) Artificial person.

Cooperative societies are artificial entities which the law regards as
existing once the procedure for their establishment has been complied.

3.4.1 Types of Cooperative Society

There are two types of corporation:

(a) Corporation Sole
(b) Corporation Aggregate

(a) Corporation Sole

This is a legal person representing an official position. The post which is
usually occupied by series of successive human beings has the General
Overseer of a Church, the Vice Chancellor of a University, the Oba, the
Obi, Emir or Eze of a Town.

(b) Corporation Aggregate

This is also a legal person formed by a group of people for the purpose
of carrying on certain activities, especially trading for profit. They are

         39
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

simply known as companies. They usually have more members i.e.
limited liability companies.

The cooperative law equally divides cooperative societies into the
following:

(i) Primary Cooperative Society;
(ii) Secondary Cooperative Organisation;
(iii) Central Financing Society;
(iv) Central Society; and
(v) Apex Cooperative Society

1. Primary Cooperative Society

This is a cooperative organisation whose membership is made up of at
least ten persons. It is the commonest type of cooperative society as it
can be found all over the state including the urban and rural areas.

It is formed by people with common interest either as residents of a
particular area, or trader in a particular commodity etc. It must have at
least ten (10) persons and such persons must have individually satisfied
the provision of Section 24, which state expressly that "no person must
be a member of more than one registered society whose primary
objective is to grant loans to its members, except such a person has been
given prior consent to do so by the registered society concerned".

2. Secondary Cooperative Organisation

This refers to a cooperative organisation whose membership is made up
of primary cooperative societies.

Each of the above type of cooperative societies can either have its
liability limited or unlimited, but in practice, one will find out that most
cooperative societies are limited liability.

3. Central Financing Society

This is a registered society of which the principal object is to make loans
available to other registered societies.

4. Central Society

This is a registered society established to facilitate the operations of
registered societies in accordance with cooperative principles and
includes a central financing society. However, this type of society can

40
CRD 203  MODULES

only be registered under the Cooperative Law if it has at least two
registered societies as its members.

5. Apex Cooperative Society

This is a cooperative organisation whose membership is made up of
secondary cooperative societies.

Cooperative societies may either be limited or unlimited.

(a) Limited Company or Cooperative Society
(b) Unlimited Liability Company

(a) Limited Company or Cooperative Society

A limited company or cooperative societies may be limited by shares or
limited by guarantee.

(i) Limited by Shares ­ this means that the liability of members is
limited by the Memorandum to the amount of unpaid shares.
(ii) Company or Cooperative Society Limited by Guarantee ­ this
means that the members liability is limited by the Memorandum to the
amount which the members may respectively undertake to contribute to
the assets of the company or society in the event of winding up or
liquidation.

Generally, a company limited by guarantee shall not be incorporated for
the object of carrying on business of profit to be distributed to members.
All charitable companies or associations are registered as companies
limited by guarantee and cannot have share capital.

(b) Unlimited Liability Company

There is no limit to the amount of liability which members can incur in
the event of liquidation. Members have to contribute, if possible from
various other sources to pay for the debt of the company or cooperative
society.

3.4.2 Features of the Cooperative Society under the
       Cooperative Law Decree 90 of 1993

The features are as follows:

(a) It established a Cooperative Societies Decree herein after referred
        to as Nigeria Cooperative Society Decree of 1993 Section 1;

         41
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

(b) As for the formation of the Cooperative Society under the
        Decree, any ten (10) persons or more may form a primary
        society, Section 22;

(c) Under the Decree, a society may be registered as an industrial
        society or as a primary or secondary society;

(d) A society may be registered as a cooperative society under the
        Decree if:

(i) It is a limited liability society, and
(ii) It has as its objects the promotion of the socio-economic interests

        of its members in accordance with the cooperative principles or
        established for the purpose of facilitating the operations of those
        societies.

(e) The Cooperative Society Decree also seemed to have abolished
        the age long rule in Foss v. Harbottle (1843) 2 K.B461 which
        states that where a wrong had been done to the cooperative
        society or in a case of irregularity in its operations, the proper
        plaintiff should be the company.

3.5 Formation of a Cooperative Society

Promotion of a cooperative society is like the promotion of a company
which is usually undertaken by a person who takes necessary steps and
makes necessary arrangement towards incorporation or registration.

Such steps may also involve engaging the services of professionals such
as Accountant and Lawyers who are one of the promoters in the real
sense of it. 53

3.5.1 Duties of Promoters of Cooperative Societies

The duties of promoters of cooperative societies are as follows:

(a) He decides on the name, the object, address and liabilities of
        members;

(b) He prepares the cooperative society bye-laws;
(c) He forward the cooperative society name, bye-laws for

        registration;
(d) He registers the cooperative society with its bye-laws.

3.6 Registration of a Cooperative Society

To be qualified for registration as a cooperative society, the association
must be limited liability society and has at its objects the promotion of
the socio-economic interest of its members which must be in accordance

42
CRD 203  MODULES

with the cooperative principles. The purpose of its establishment must
also be to facilitate the operation of these principles.

A cooperative society is registered where all necessary forms have been
filled and lodged with the Director of Cooperative Society. It is also
accompanied by the document such as the proposed bye-laws of the
society as prescribed by the Director. Registered office (not post office
box) and the declaration of compliance with the provision of the
Nigerian Cooperative Societies Decree 90 of 1993.

The Director of Cooperative Societies, upon being satisfied, issues a
Certificate. The duties of the Director of Cooperative Societies are
merely administrative. The Cooperative Societies commence business
immediately the society is registered.

Section 5 (1) of the Cooperative Societies Laws of Nigeria states that:
"If the Director is satisfied that a society has complied with the
provision of Sections 3 and 4 of the Decree and that its proposed bye-
laws are not contrary to the provisions of the Law, he shall register the
society and the bye-laws".

Section 5 (2) states that "If the Director refuses to register a society, the
society may, within 60 days from the date of the notification to it by the
Director of his refusal to register the society, appeal against the refusal
to the Minister or Commissioner as the case may be".

Section 5 (3) states that "The Director shall within 60 days dispose of an
application for registration by a society".

3.7 Conditions for Non-Registration of a Cooperative Society

According to Sections 3 and 4 of the Cooperative Society Laws of the
Federation, the Director of Cooperative shall register the society except
and unless in his opinion:

(a) It does not comply with the provisions of the Decree;
(b) The business which the cooperative society is to carry on or the

        objects for which it is formed or any of them are illegal;
(c) There is non-compliance with the requirements of any other law

        as to registration of cooperative societies;
(d) The proposed name conflicts with or is likely to conflict with the

        provisions of the Cooperative Society Decree, 1993.

         43
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.8 Consequence of Registration

According to Section 6 (1), upon Registration of a Cooperative Society
and its bye-laws, the Director of Cooperative shall certify under its seal
as follows:

(a) As a body corporate by the name under which it is registered;
(b) Has perpetual succession and a common seal;
(c) Have powers to hold movable and immovable property;
(d) Enter into contract;
(e) Have power to institute and defend suits and other legal

        proceedings, and
(f) Do all things necessary for the purpose of its constitution.

3.9 The Certificate of Registration

According to Section 7 of the Cooperative Society Laws of 1993, the
Certificate of Registration signed, sealed and delivered by the Director
of Cooperative shall be conclusive evidence that the society mentioned
in the Certificate is duly registered. This means that all requirements of
this Decree in respect of registration and of matters precedent and
incidental to it have been complied with. As from the date of registration
mentioned on the Certificate of Registration of the Cooperative Society,
the society becomes a body corporate.

3.10 Effects of Registration

Upon registration, the cooperative society becomes a corporate body and
legal personality with the following characteristics:

It assumes a separate existence distinct from that of its founder. It
becomes a legal personality according to the doctrine in Salomon v.
Salomon (1897) AC 22 (HC). Also in Lee v. Lee (1961) 6 AC 12. Lee
established and incorporated a flying school for trainee pilots. The
company had a share capital of 300 out of which Lee had 299. Lee later
died in a crash. His widow claimed compensation from the company. It
was held that she was entitled to the claim because late Lee and Lees
air Farming Limited were separate and distinct legal person.

(a) The society assumes perpetual succession. It can never die except
        liquidated through the statutorily laid down procedure of winding
        up.

(b) There is transfer and transmission of shares or interest.
(c) It can hold, own or dispose of properties.
(d) It can borrow or lend out money in its own name.
(e) As a juristic personality, it can sue and be sued in its own name.

44
CRD 203  MODULES

4.0 CONCLUSION

Although the cooperative society is a legal entity and separate from its
founders as enunciated in Salomon v. Salomon and Lee v. Lees Air
Farming Limited, it invariably conducts its affairs through the
instrumentality of the agency of a natural person. These natural persons
are elected from members of the society and their actions bind the
society.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, you learnt:

 the appointment of Directors by the Federal or State Government;
 the functions and powers of the Directors;
 Registration of cooperative societies;
 the conditions to be fulfilled before registration of cooperative

        societies and the effect of registration on cooperative societies.

6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss the conditions for registration of cooperative societies.
2. Mention and explain two types of cooperative societies.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers.

Kachukwu, E.I. and Ozekhome, Mike A.A. (1988). Nigeria Law of
        Contract. Mikzek Publications Limited.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates.

Vishnoo, Bhaawan and Vidya Bhushai. Public Administration. S. Chand
        Higher Academy, pg. 67.

         45
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 2 FUNCTIONS OF BOARDS OF DIRECTOR IN A
               CO-OPERATIVE ORGANIZATION

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Qualifications of a Director
        3.2 Functions of a Director
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The constitution of the board of directors is very important in the
management of co-operative societies. The guidelines for the selection
of the board members are usually stipulated in the bye laws governing
the conduct of the societies.

The selection process needs to be properly followed so that qualified
board members can emerge for the society. The boards of directors
again have stipulated functions to be performed so as to meet the set
objectives of the society. In this unit therefore, we shall be examining
the guidelines for the selection of the board of directors. Emphasis is
however placed on the functions of the directors in the management of
co-operative societies in
Nigeria.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 understand the guidelines for the selection of board of directors
        of the cooperative societies

 know the various functions of the board of directors of the
        management of cooperative societies as stipulated by the bye-
        laws of the societies.

46
CRD 203  MODULES

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Qualifications of a Director

For effective management, a co-operative society must follow some
guidelines in selecting directors. The following are some of the
important qualifications to consider:

Director should

i. Believe in, invest in, and patronize the co-operative;
ii. Be willing to take the time necessary to attend and participate in

        all board meetings;
iii. Be qualified to make decisions in the overall interest of the

        organization;
iv. Work well with others as a team and support majority decisions;
v. Neither expect nor promote special favours for himself, relatives

        or friends;
vi. Not discuss with outsiders confidential matters brought up in

        board meeting;
vii. Not be influenced by religious, political or other issues unrelated

        to the business of the co-operatives;
viii. Be progressive in developing new ideas that will contribute to the

        success of the organization;
xi. Willingly submit such ideas for consideration for the collective

        progress of his society

3.2 Functions of a Director

The functions of Directors are normally set out in the associations bye-
laws.

In addition the following functions are particularly important:

a. Become familiar with the articles of incorporation and bye-laws
        of the cooperative and conduct the business in accordance with
        their provisions;

b. Retain a legal adviser who is familiar with co-operative laws for
        legal advice as needed;

c. Hire a competent manager, determine his salary and outline his
        duties and authority. The board should give special consideration
        to the following items when selecting a manager:
        i. Age and physical condition
        ii. Business experience, integrity and an understanding of the
                necessary record keeping in a co-operative

         47
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

        iii. Ability to work with people and to select and train
                employees

        iv. Ability to plan ahead and co-ordinate operations
        v. A general understanding of co-operatives and their

                objectives
        vi. Determination to follow co-operative principles

                d. Adopt policies for the guidance of the manager and
                make them a part of the minutes. They should include such
                items as credit to patrons, source and limits of supply
                inventories, general personnel regulations, etc.
e. Require written monthly financial reports and operating
        statements for board meetings in order to be informed of adverse
        as well as favourable operations.
f. Direct the manager to prepare before the close of each year an
        operating budget for the next fiscal year for the approval of the
        board. This budget should estimate the volume of sales and gross
        income of various items to be handled, the expenses by account
        clarifications, and the expected net income. This constitutes
        forward planning on the part of the board and management. The
        budget should be viewed at intervals throughout the year to
        determine the trends of the business. Explanations should be
        found for serious deviations from the budget.
g. Attend regular and special meetings of the board. At times, it may
        be desirable for boards to devote a part of their meeting to an
        executive session where only board members are present to
        permit a completely free discussion.
h. Understand the terms of all contracts into which the co-operative
        has entered by authority of the board-leases, loan agreements,
        supply and other contracts, etc.
i. Be sure that any projected expansion programme is definitely
        needed and that provision is made for adequate financing before
        giving final approval.
j. The board should maintain an active interest in the amount and
        condition of inventories and make such inspections as conditions
        warrant.
k. Employ a qualified auditor to make an independent audit at
        regular intervals of at least once each year and report directly to
        the board.
l. Board members should not act independently on matters which
        should be decided by the entire board.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, learners were taken through explanations on the functions of
the board of directors of co-operative societies. This discussion was
anchored on the provision of the bye-laws. Deep understanding of these

48
CRD 203  MODULES

functions will enable the learners know the various functions expected
of the board of directors of the co-operative societies.

5.0 SUMMARY

In-depth information was provided on the guidelines for selecting
directors of management boards of co-operative societies. The various
functions of the directors as stated by the associations bye laws were
fully discussed. Learners may also know other information such as the
process of conducting a board of directors meetings.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Explain the guidelines for the selection of directors.
2. List and fully discuss at least six (6) functions of the board of

        directors of cooperative societies.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Adeyeye, S.O. (1978): The Co-operative Movement in Nigeria-
        Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow. Gottingen-Vandenhoech and
        Ruprecht.

Akinwumi, J.A. (1989):Co-operatives: The answer to Nigerias
        Producer- Consumer Dilemma. Faculty Lecture Series.No 2.

Akinwumi,J.A.(1988):Business Management for Co-operative Students
        and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural Economics.
        University of Ibadan.

Ihimodu,I.I. (1988):Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
        Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
        Nigeria.

         49
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 3 NATURE OF GENERAL MEETINGS IN A CO-
               OPERATIVE SOCIETY

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Quorum of a General Meeting
        3.2 Powers of Annual General Meeting
        3.3 Voting in General Meeting
        3.4 Length and service of notice for calling General Meeting
        3.5 Minutes of General Meeting
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Without any prejudice to the provisions of the Delhi Co-operative
Societies Rule1973, every co-operative society is expected to hold a
meeting of its general body which shall be styled ,,Annual General
Meeting at the intervals and in accordance with the provisions specified
below:-

a) the first annual general meeting shall be held within eighteen
        months of its registration.

b) the next annual general meeting shall be held by the society
        within six months of 15th April following the expiry of the co-
        operative year in which the first, annual general meeting was held
        and thereafter an annuals general meeting shall be held within six
        months after 15th April following the expiry of each co-operative
        year. (Amended on 18.5.89)

c) except in the case where in the exercise of his power under
        section 29, the Registrar has extended the time for holding the
        annual general meeting by any co-operative society, not more
        than fifteen months shall lapse between the date of one annuals
        general meeting and that of the next.

(d) where a managing committee of the society fails to hold the
        general body meeting within the prescribed time limit referred to
        above, the Registrar, shall call a general body meeting of the
        society to transact the business as provided under section 29 and
        the expenditure incurred thereon shall be a charge on the
        delinquent members of the committee of the society who have
        failed to conduct the general body meeting of the society within

50
CRD 203  MODULES

        the prescribed time limit. The said amount shall be recoverable as
        arrears of land revenue from such delinquent members of the
        committee of the society by the Registrar. (Added on 6.8.97).

A requisition for a special general meeting to be convened under section
30 shall state the object of the meeting time and date of the meeting, and
shall be signed by the members or the Registrar, as the case may be, and
shall be sent to the registered office of the society.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 be able to understand the how quorum is formed for general
        meetings

 appreciate the powers of annual general meetings
 understand how voting is conducted at general meetings
 understand the length and service of notice for calling general

        meetings
 understand the relevance and contents of the minutes of general

        meetings.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Quorum of a General Meeting

a. Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws, the quorum
        for a general meeting shall be one third of the total number of
        members subsisting as such on the date of notice of the meeting
        subject to a minimum of ten members.

b. No business shall be transacted at any general meeting unless
        there is a quorum at a time where the business of the meeting is
        due to commerce.

c. If within one hour from the time appointed for the meeting a
        quorum is not present, the meeting shall stand adjourned for half
        an hour on the same day, which should be specified in the notice
        calling the meeting, but if the meeting is called upon the
        requisition of the members of the society (not the Registrar) it
        shall stand dissolved.
        (Amended on 6.8.97). Provided that at the adjourned meeting, no
        quorum shall be necessary.

d. If at any time during the meeting sufficient number of members is
        not present to form a quorum, the Chairman/President of the
        meeting, on his own motion or on his attention being drawn to
        this fact, shall adjourn the meeting at such convenient time. Date

         51
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

        and place as he thinks fit. And the business to be transacted at the
        adjourned meeting shall be transacted in the usual manner even if
        no quorum is there present.

3.2 Powers of Annual General Meeting

1. Without prejudice to the provisions of section 29, the general
        meeting alone shall have the power to transact the following
        business:-
        (a) Fixing the maximum credit limit of a co-operative society
                subject to the approval of the Registrar.
        (b) Election, suspension and removal of members of the
                committee other than the nominated members. Provided
                that an interim vacancy of the committee may be filled up
                by Co-option by the remaining member of the committee
                till the election is held.
        (c) Expulsion of the members.

3.3 Voting In General Meeting

1. A resolution which is put to the vote of a general meeting shall be
        decided by a show of hand unless (whether before or after the
        declaration of the result of the show of hands) a poll is demanded
        by at least ten members and greed by the Chairman and if no poll
        is demanded, a declaration by the Chairman of such meeting that
        a resolution has been carried or lost and an entry to that effect in
        the minutes of the proceedings shall, for the purposes of the Act,
        be conclusive proof of the fact that such resolution has been duly
        carried or lost but. It shall not be proof of the number or
        proportion of the votes recorded in favour of or against such
        resolution.

2. If a poll is demanded, the votes shall be taken in such manner and
        at such time as the Chairman of the meeting directs subject to any
        provision in the bye-laws in this behalf, and the result of such
        poll shall be deemed to be the decision regarding the resolution
        over which the poll is demanded.

3. Subject to the Rules and the bye-laws, when a poll is taken the*
        voting may be by ballot, if the Chairman of the meeting so
        decides.

4. When a poll is taken the number of members voting for or against
        a resolution shall be recorded in the minutes of the proceedings.

3.4 Length and service of notice for calling General Meeting

1. Annual general meeting of a co-operative society may be called
        by giving not less than 14 days notice in writing.

52
CRD 203  MODULES

2. Special general meeting of a co-operative society may be called
        by giving not less than seven days notice in writing.

3. Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws, when a
        general meeting is called under the proviso to sub section (1) of
        section 29, or in pursuance of sub-section (2) of section 30, the
        Registrar may determine the period of notice for such meeting,
        the time and place of the meeting and the subject to be considered
        thereat. Registrar may preside over such meeting or authorize any
        person to so preside.

4. Notice of every general meeting of a co-operative society shall be
        given to every member of the society either personally or by
        sending it by post to him at his registered address in the Union
        Territory of Delhi, or if he has no registered address in Delhi to
        the address if any out of Delhi supplied by him to the society for
        giving notices to him. Where the notice is sent by post, service
        thereof shall be deemed to be effected after the expiry of forty-
        eight hours after the letter containing the notice is posted by
        properly addressing, prepaying and posting it, provided that
        where a member has intimated to the society in advance that
        notice of a general meeting should be sent to him by registered
        post with or without acknowledgement due and has deposited or
        has given under taking to deposit with the society a sum
        sufficient to defray the expenses of doing so, the service of the
        notice shall not be deemed to be effected unless it is sent by
        registered post.

5. The accidental omission in the opinion of the Registrar to give
        notice or a non-receipt of notice by any member shall not
        invalidate the proceedings at the genera) meeting.

6. The notice of an annual general meeting shall be accompanied by
        a copy each of audited balance-sheet profit and loss account
        together with the audit report thereon relating to the preceding
        year and the report of the committee (Amended on 24.5.82)

3.5 Minutes of General Meeting

1. Every co-operative society shall cause minutes of proceedings of
        general meetings to be entered in a book kept for that purpose.

2. Unless the minutes are drawn up and are dully signed by the
        Chairman immediately on the termination of the meeting, the
        minutes free from all alterations or corrections, shall be drawn up
        and shall be signed by the Chairman of the meeting within four
        working days from the time when the meeting terminated, the
        minutes so signed shall be evidence of the proceeding of the
        meeting. (Amended on 24.5.82)

         53
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3. Until the contrary is proved, every general meeting of a society in
        respect of the proceedings whereof minutes have been so
        recorded shall be deemed to have been duly called and held.

4.0 CONCLUSION

Different areas of interest bordering on quorum of a general meeting,
powers of annual general meeting, voting in general meeting, length and
services of notice for calling general meetings and minutes of general
meetings have been carefully discussed. Special reference has been
made to the provision of the Delhi Co-operative Societies Rule, 1973.
The provision has a global application and acceptability particularly in
the developing economies.

5.0 SUMMARY

This unit has treated very germane topics on General Meetings in co-
operative societies. Information so acquired is expected to be of
immense benefits to the learners, particularly in the management of the
co-operatives.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss the powers of annual general meetings.
2. Explain the voting process at general meetings.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

The Delhi Co-operative Societies Rule (1973): Management of Co-
        operative Societies.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999): General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates. p115.

54
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 4 NATURE OF A MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE
               IN A CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Meetings of the Management Committee
        3.2 Suppression of Committee
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Good management is essential to a successful co-operative society as it
enables the society achieve the set objectives. However, quite often,
Management committees are put in place to, on behalf of the society,
undergo certain responsibilities. Members of these committees are
usually people of proven integrity (people of impeccable
characters).They are usually professionals in their chosen careers and
therefore believed to be able to handle responsibilities for the societies
with assured success. This unit therefore makes special reference to the
Delhi Co-operative Societies Rule, 1973 for fuller discussions.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of the unit, you should be able to:

 understand the relevance of management committee in the
        running of co-operatives

 explain what could lead to the suppression of management
        committee

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Meetings of the Management Committee.

1. A committee of a co-operative society shall exercise all the
        powers of the society, discharge alt the duties as may be specified
        in its byelaws by means of resolutions passed at its meetings. No
        resolution shall be passed by circulation.

         55
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

2. A committee shall meet as often as required but a meeting shall
        be held at least once in every month, in case of Primary Societies
        and one in three months in case of Federal Societies and
        Financing Bank provided that where the committee fails to hold
        meeting for 3 consecutive months in case of primary Coop.
        Societies and 9 months in case of Federal Societies and Financing
        Bank, the Registrar may appoint the Election Officer for
        conducting the Election of the managing committee of such
        Primary Society, Federal society or Financing bank (Amended on
        24.5.82).

3. Notice of every meeting shall be given to every member of the
        committee in writing under the signature of the President or
        Secretary at least 5 days prior to the scheduled date to meeting
        which must be served either personally or by post under
        certificate of posting. Where the notice is sent by post services
        thereof shall be deemed to be effective after the expiry of 48
        hours after the letter containing the notice is posted properly,
        addressing, prepaying, posting it. Provided that where a member
        has initiated to the society in advance that notice of a committee
        meeting should be sent to him by Registered post with or without
        acknowledgement due and has deposited or had given
        undertaking to deposit with the society a sum sufficient to defray
        the expenses of doing so, the service of notice shall not be
        deemed to be effective unless it is sent by Registered Post.
        However, in case of an emergent meeting, the service of such
        notice of the emergent meeting must be ensured at least 24 hours
        before the scheduled date and time of the meeting. (Amended on
        S.9.88)

4. If a member of the committee of a society fails to attend its three
        mandatory meetings (monthly)/ (quarterly) consecutively, he
        shall be given notice of it by registered post and shall be deemed
        to have vacated his office and from that date shall cease to be a
        member of the committee, the vacancy shall be filled by co-
        option by other members of the committee. (Amended on 6.8.97)

5. Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws of any
        cooperative society, the committee of a co-operative society shall
        cause minutes of all proceedings of its meeting to be entered in
        the book for the purpose in handwritten at the spot in presence of
        members present and voting. The minutes of each meeting shall
        contain the names of the members present, names of the
        members, if any, dissenting from or not concurring in and of its
        religion. At the end of the minutes each member present and
        voting shall sign them. If the minutes are not made and recorded

56
CRD 203  MODULES

        in this mariner they shall not be considered valid and under such
        circumstances, it shall be presumed that no meeting was help.
        Provided that in case of urban cooperative banks, urban thrift and
        credit societies and co-operative federations, the proceeding shall
        be signed by the Chairman of the meeting and shall be confirmed
        in the next meeting of the committee. (Amended on 6.8.97)

6. Notwithstanding anything contained in the bye-laws of the
        cooperative society, the quorum for a committee shall be one
        third of the total number of the members of committee subject to
        a minimum of three. (Amended on 6.8.97)

3.2 Suppression of Committee

l. The notice to show cause why the committee of a co-operative
        society shall not be removed under section 32 shall contain the
        grounds on which the proposed action is contemplated and shall
        be addressed to the Chairman/President of the society and sent to
        him at his last known address, if any, or at the registered address
        of the society by registered post. The service of the notice shall
        be complete as soon as the letter containing this notice is posted.

2. As soon as the Registrar under section 32 makes the order
        removing the committee. All the members of the committee shall
        be deemed to have vacated their respective offices from the date
        of the order and shall hand over charge of the assets and
        liabilities and record of the society to a person appointed by the
        registrar or to the Administrator appointed by him.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, learners were taken through discussions on the meetings of
the management committees and the causes of suppression of
committee.
Information so gained enables the learners know the key roles that
management committees play in co-operative affairs.

5.0 SUMMARY

Management committees are very important in the running of co-
operatives.
Members of the committee undertake series of responsibilities on behalf
of the society thereby reducing bureaucracy and time wastage.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

         57
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

1. Explain the importance of the management committee in co-
        operatives.

2. Identify ways of suppression of Committee.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988): Business Management for Co-operative
        Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
        Economics, University of Ibadan.

Ihimodu ,I.I. (1988):Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
        Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
        Nigeria

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

58
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 5 ROLES OF MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 The Management Committee
        3.2 Roles of Management Committee
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The management committee constitutes a very vital organ in the policy
formulation and direction of registered societies generally. Such is the
powers and statute of the committee that the general meeting cannot
overturn the acts of the committee provided they are within the powers
delegated to them.

Further, the committee is restricted also by the rules of the society as
spelt out by the bye-laws of the co-operative. This is because any act
done or purportedly done by the committee which is outside the powers
of the society is said to violate the ultra vires doctrine as it applies to
registered societies.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 explain the term ,,management committee.
 identify and discuss the roles of management committee of co-

        operative societies.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 The Management Committees

Management committee/board members have ultimate responsibility for
directing the activity of the organization, ensuring it is well run and
delivering the outcomes for which it has been set up. Every management
committee/board should provide leadership to the society by:

         59
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

 Setting the strategic direction to guide and direct the activities of
        the organization;

 Ensuring the effective management of the organization and its
        activities; and

 Monitoring the activities of the organization to ensure they are in
        keeping with the founding principles, objects and values.

3.2 Roles of Management Committee

Management committee members carry out a vital role on behalf of the
cooperative society. Their role is not necessarily about doing, it is about
ensuring things are done. Usually, the day-to-day management of the
organization will be delegated to paid staff or to volunteers, although the
management committees of smaller organizations are often much more
actively involved. The management committee is the group of people
who are held accountable for the activities of the co-operative. It is the
ultimate decision-making forum. Management Committees are also
frequently referred to as Boards of Trustees, Governing Bodies, or
Executive Committees.

The Management Committee plays an important role i the organization
as both leaders and decision-makers. The overall responsibilities of the
committee are summarized below:

a. Vision and Leadership

The management committee ensures that everything the society does
supports its vision, purpose and aims. They establish the fundamental
values, the ethical principles and strategic direction in which the
cooperative operates.

b. Accountability

The Management Committee must account for everything the
organization does, including its spending and other activities. The
Committee is accountable to the membership of the society and other
stakeholders such as funders and donors.

The Committee monitors and evaluates all areas of the societys
performance.

c. Keeping it Legal

The Management Committee ensures compliance with all relevant legal
and regulatory requirements and seeks guidance around any

60
CRD 203  MODULES

uncertainties. Everything the Committee and the society do must also be
in line with the provisions of the bye-laws.

d. Financial Oversight

The Management Committee ensures that all money, property and
resources are properly used, managed and accounted for. In order to be
accountable, suitable systems must be in place and kept up to date.

e. Managing Staff and Volunteers

In societies that employ staff, the Management Committee is essentially
the employer. They must ensure that appropriate policies and in place
for staff and for volunteers, ad that both are properly managed ad
supported. The management Committee, usually represented by the
Chairperson, also directly line manages the most senior staff member.

4.0 CONCLUSION

This unit discussed the concept of management committee and roles of
management committees in co-operative societies. Effective
performance of the committee will help to ensure high level of
efficiency and robust management portfolio for the co-operatives.

5.0 SUMMARY

Management committees play vital roles in the running of co-operative
societies as they are usually charged with the responsibilities of carrying
out certain obligations on behalf of the society. Good committee
performance enables the society to achieve the set objectives as
provided in the bye-laws.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. What do you understand by ,,Management Committee?
2. List and discuss the roles of Management Committee in the

        running of the affairs of co-operative societies.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988): Business Management for Co-operative
        Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
        Economics, University of Ibadan.

DIY Committee Guide (2005):Roles of the Management Committee.
        London.

         61
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Ihimodu, I.I. (1988):Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
        Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
        Nigeria.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

62
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 6 COMPOSITION OF A MANAGEMENT
               COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Composition of a Management Committee
                3.1.1 The Chairperson
                3.1.2 The Secretary
                3.1.3 The Treasurer
                3.1.4 The Vice Chair

4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The Co-operative society needs to carry a lot of responsibilities for and
on behalf of the members in order to meet their yearnings and
aspirations. However, to ensure effectiveness and reduce bureaucracy in
the discharge of the responsibilities by the societies to members, it may
be imperative to assign some of the responsibilities to appointed/selected
officials who will carry out these duties on behalf of the society. Some
of these officials include Chairperson, Vice Chair, Secretary and
Treasurer. In this unit therefore, learners are put through tutorials on the
composition of then management committee.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of the unit, learners are expected to:

 understand the composition of the management committee of the
        co-operative society

 appreciate the distinct roles of the key officers of the
        management committee.

         63
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Composition of a Management Committee

Management committees comprise the key officers who take certain
responsibilities on behalf of the committee. Prominent among these
officers are:

 Chairperson
 Vice chair person
 Secretary
 Treasurer

The management committee may need some of its members to take
special roles to help it function effectively. These members are
described as office-bearers or honorary officers.

Honorary officers generally include chairperson, secretary, and a
treasurer.

Some societies have additional honorary officers. These may include
Vice- Chair, Vice Secretary, Press Officer and so forth. The societys
bye-law should indicate how honorary officers are to be elected or
selected. It is important to check the bye-law for details and ensure these
terms are adhered to. The role of the officers may include taking the lead
in preparing for management committee meetings (e.g. agendas,
information papers, hiring venues, etc.).Unless the management
committee has explicitly delegated decision-making powers to the
honorary officers, they should act in an advisory capacity and must take
care to report their activities fully to the management committee.

The societies should continually check their bye-laws for details of how
honorary officers should be selected and elected. All honorary officers
should be clear regarding their functions. Therefore; it is good practice
to have written role descriptions.

3.1.1 The Chairperson

Chairing is a key role on any management committee. The Chairperson
ensures that the management committee functions properly, that there is
full participation during meetings that all relevant matters are discussed
and that effective decisions are made and carried out. The role of a
chairperson can be time consuming, involving work between meetings,
external representations of the society, and work with staff. The
Chairperson usually takes on direct management responsibility for the

64
CRD 203  MODULES

most senior staff member. Chairing a large society requires diplomatic
and leadership skills of a high level.

3.1.2 The Secretary

The role of the Secretary depends on the type and size of the society. In
societies without paid staff, the secretary often takes minutes, deals with
correspondence and keeps records. In societies with paid staff, these
functions are often performed by staff.

3.1.3 The Treasurer

The overall role of the treasurer is to maintain an overview of the co-
operative societys financial status and to ensure proper financial records
and procedures are maintained. In small charities without paid staff the
Treasurer may take a greater role in the day-to-day finances of the
organization. It is important to note that final responsibility for financial
matters always rests with the management committee as a whole.

3.1.4 The Vice Chair

The Vice-Chair acts for the Chair when she/he is not available and
undertakes assignments at the request of the Chair. To ensure continuity
every society should ensure that that chair has a deputy who can assume
their responsibility and is familiar with their work should a sudden
absence occur.

4.0 CONCLUSION

Officials of the management committee of co-operative society carry out
some responsibilities on behalf of the society. This is usually done to
ensure effectiveness in the way and manners business and financial
activities are conducted for the society. Management committee should
therefore ensure that in the appointment/selection of the officials priority
should be given to members who have high level of integrity and have
records of good performance (pedigree).Learners are therefore expected
to find the information so provided in this unit highly resourceful.

5.0 SUMMARY

The quality of the officials of the management committee of co-
operative society often determines the quantum and quality of service
delivery of the society to members. Proper attention should therefore be
paid to the type of the members who are selected/appointed as
constituent members of the management committee of the society.

         65
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Clearly explain the composition of a management committee of
        co-operative society.

2. List and discuss the roles of each of these management
        committee members.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988): Business Management for Co-operative
        Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
        Economics, University of Ibadan.

DIY Committee Guide (2005):Roles of the Management Committee.
        London.

Ihimodu, I.I.(1988): Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
        Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
        Nigeria.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

66
CRD 203   MODULES

MODULE 3

Unit 1   Functions of the officials of management committee
Unit 2   Delegation of Management Committee functions
Unit 3   Audit Inspection and enquiry committee
Unit 4   Procedures for Auditors appointment
Unit 5   Functions and Powers of Auditors
Unit 6   Inquiry and inspection of co-operatives

UNIT 1 FUNCTIONS OF THE OFFICIALS OF
               MANAGEMENT COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Key officials of Management Committee
        3.2 Functions of officials of Management Committee
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

For convenience of administration of the co-operative societies
Management Committees are often put in place. Officials of these
Committees are selected/elected based on the provision of the bye-laws.
The principal members of these committees include the Chairperson, the
secretary and the treasurer.

The level of seriousness attached to the discharge of responsibilities by
each of these officials determines the efficiency of performance of
activities of these societies. In this unit therefore, learners are taken
through the various functions of the officials of the Management
Committees of the co-operative societies.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit the to

 know the key officials of management committees
 identify the functions of the officials of the management

        committees of cooperative societies.

                                                                                                     67
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Key officials of management Committee

The key officials of the Management Committee of co-operative society
are:

i. Treasurer
ii. Secretary, and
iii. The Chairperson

3.2 Functions of the Officials of Management Committee

The functions of the officials of Management Committee are discussed
as follows:

i. The Treasurer

The Treasurer has a watchdog role over all aspects of financial
management, working closely with other members of the Management
Committee to safeguard the societys finances. It is important to note
that although the Treasurer ensures that these responsibilities are met,
much of the work may be delegated to a finance sub-committee and paid
staff or volunteers.

In summary, the Treasurer is responsible for:

A. General financial oversight

a) Funding, fundraising and sales
b) Financial planning and budgeting
c) Financial reporting
d) Banking, book- keeping and record keeping
e) Control of fixed assets and stock

Given these responsibilities, the Treasurer typically acts as an
information and reference point for the Chair and other committee
members: clarifying financial implications of proposals; confirming
legal requirements; outlining the current financial status; and retrieving
relevant documentation.

ii. The Secretary

The role of the secretary is to support the Chair in ensuring the smooth
functioning of the Management Committee. In summary, the Secretary
is responsible for:

68
CRD 203  MODULES

i. Ensuring meetings are effectively organized and minutes
ii. Maintaining effective records and administration
iii. Upholding the legal requirements of governing documents,

        charity law, company law etc. (where relevant)
iv. Communication and correspondence

It is important to note that although the secretary ensures that these
responsibilities are met, much of the work may be delegated to paid staff
or volunteers. Given these responsibilities, the secretary often acts as an
information and reference point for the Chair and other committee
members; clarifying past practices and decisions; confirming legal
requirements; and retrieving relevant documentation.

iii. The Chairperson

Chairing is a key role on any voluntary Management Committee. The
Chairperson must ensure that the Management Committee functions
properly, that there is full participation during meetings that all relevant
matters are discussed and that effective decisions are made and carried
out. The role of a chairperson is time consuming, with work between
meetings, external representation of the society and work with staff.
Chairing a large society requires diplomatic and leadership skills of a
high level.

Main duties of the Chairperson

The responsibilities of a Chairperson can be summarized under four
areas:

i. To ensure the Management Committee functions properly

The Chairperson is responsible for making sure that each meeting is
planned effectively, concluded according to the constitutions and that
matters are dealth with in an orderly, efficient manner. The Chairperson
must make the most of all his/her committee members and lead the
team. This also involves regularly reviewing the committees
performance and identifying and managing the process for renewal of
the Committee through recruitment of new members.

ii. To ensure the co-operative society is managed effectively

The Chairperson must co-ordinate the Committee to ensure that
appropriate policies and procedures are in place for the effective
management of the society.

iii. To provide support and supervision to the chief officer

         69
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

The Chairperson will often be the direct line manager for the chief
officer (the most senior staff member).

iv. To represent the society as its figurehead

The Chairperson may, from time to time, be called upon to represent the
society and sometimes be its spokesperson at, for example, functions or
meetings.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, learners have been put through discussions on the key
officials of the Management Committee of the co-operative societies.
Various functions performed by the officials of the Management
Committees were also explained. It is hoped that the learners would
have benefitted from this discussion.

5.0 SUMMARY

Functions performed by the officials of the Management Committees are
important for effective performance of the co-operative societies. There
is therefore the need for the appointment/selection of officials with
credible characters so that Management committees can effectively
discharge their duties and responsibilities to the advantage of the society
and eventually the members.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

i. List and discuss the key officials of Management Committees of Co-
operative societies
ii. Discuss the functions of the officials of Management Committees

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988):Business Management for Co-operative
        Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
        Economics, University of Ibadan.

DIY Committee Guide (2005):Roles of the Management Committee.
        London.

70
CRD 203  MODULES

Ihimodu, I.I. (1988):Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
        Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
        Nigeria

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

         71
CRD 203                   COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 2    DELEGATION      OF                     MANAGEMENT

          COMMITTEE FUNCTIONS

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Effective delegation
        3.2 Choosing to delegate
        3.3 Key points for effective delegation
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Management committees are often saddled with a lot of tasks in their
effort to ensuring the achievement of the set objectives for the members
of co-operative societies. Some of these tasks and responsibilities need
to be given (delegated) to some members considered qualified to carry
these tasks on behalf of the management committee. In this unit
therefore learners are taken through the process of delegation of
responsibilities by the management committees.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 appreciate reasons for effective delegation of responsibilities
 examine processes for choosing to delegate responsibilities
 spotlight key points for effective delegation

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Effective delegation

Delegation is necessary for all of the work of a society to be completed.
Except with very small societies, it is not possible for the members of
committee/board to do everything necessary for the smooth running of
the society. However, it is important to remember that the committee
can delegate authority but not responsibility. The committee is
ultimately accountable for everything that goes on in a society.

72
CRD 203  MODULES

3.2 Choosing to Delegate

Roles and responsibilities are delegated when particular areas of activity
need to be discussed or developed beyond the context of the
management committee meeting. For example:

 New human resource policies need to be developed
 A project needs to be managed and delivered
 Greater financial management is required

The society needs to be represented and make decisions at meetings with
funders, suppliers etc.

Depending on the nature and size of the role, delegation can be to:

i. Honorary officers
ii. A sub-committee or advisory group
iii. Paid staff or volunteers

3.3 Key Points for Effective Delegation

The following pointers are useful reminders, regardless of who you are
delegating to:

a) Make it legal

Ensure any delegation is in line with your societys governing document
and relevant legislation. Your governing document may specify, for
example, the remit of honorary officers or sub-committees and the
process for their appointment. Legislation will affect how you involve
volunteers or recruit and employ paid staff

b) Make it systematic

Ensure authority for delegation is clearly documented. Specify any
limits to, for example, decision-making authority, financial spend and
project development, without prior approval of the management
committee.

c) Provide proper oversight

Ensure a reporting mechanism is in place. The committee must be
careful to read written reports provided and ask relevant questions when
verbal reports are being given to ensure that the delegation they have
agreed is working effectively, is within the specified parameters, and
they ultimately retain control of all delegations

         73
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

d) Make it effective

Ensure the people concerned have the skills needed to carry out the task.
This can either form part of the selection criteria or be addressed
through appropriate training.

4.0 CONCLUSION

Delegation of responsibilities by management committees of co-
operative societies was discussed in this unit. The process of delegation
may become necessary in view of the need to ensure high level of
efficiency while handling numerous tasks facing the management
committees. In this unit therefore, the learners were taken through the
discussion on delegation of duties and responsibilities by the
committees.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, learners were tutored on the need for an effective delegation,
process of choosing to delegate responsibilities and the key points for
ensuring an effective delegation.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss reasons for delegation of responsibilities among
        management committee

2. List and explain the key points for effective delegation

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988): Business Management for Co-operative
        Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
        Economics, University of Ibadan.

DIY Committee Guide (2005): Roles of the Management Committee.
        London.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999): General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates. p115

74
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 3 AUDIT INSPECTION AND ENQUIRY
               COMMITTEE

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 The Auditor
        3.2 Duties and Powers of Auditors
        3.3 Audit Inspection and Inquiry Committee
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Basically, co-operative societies are put in place to provide services and
goods to members at minimal costs. For the co-operatives to actualize
this objective there is the need to reduce the level of fraud and
inefficiency in the financial and business transactions of the co-
operatives. Hence the needs to constitute the audit inspection and
inquiry committee which will regularly scrutinize all the activities of the
society. In this unit therefore, discussions shall be centred on audit
inspection and inquiry committee of the co-operative societies.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 define who an auditor is.
 enumerate and explain the duties and powers of auditors
 clearly justify the relevance of audit and inquiry committee in the

        management of co-operatives

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 The Auditor

Every registered society must appoint an auditor, who must be a
member of a recognised supervisory body and must neither be a member
of nor be connected with the management of the registered society
(section 36 (1)).

         75
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.2 Duties and Powers of Auditors

The statutory duty of an auditor is to report to the members whether the
accounts give a true and fair view and have been properly prepared in
accordance with the Cooperative Decree 1993. To fulfil this duty, the
auditor must carry out such investigations as are necessary to form an
opinion as to whether:

(a) proper accounting records have been kept and proper returns
        adequate for the auditor have been received from branches;

(b) the accounts are in agreement with the records; and
(c) the information given in the directors report is consistent with

        the accounts. If the auditor is satisfied on these matters they need
        not be mentioned in the report.

The auditors report must be read before any general meeting at which
the accounts are considered and must be open to inspection by members.
The auditor may also attend any meeting after resigning at which his
successor is appointed and also the meeting at which his office would
have expired.

Auditors have wide statutory powers to enable them to obtain whatever
information they may require for the purpose of their audit. In particular,
they may inspect books and records and call on officers of the registered
society for information or explanations. It is a criminal offence for an
officer of the society to make a false statement to an auditor if it is
misleading, false or deceptive in a material particular and is made
knowingly or recklessly (with indifference as to its truth).

3.3 Audit Inspection and Inquiry Committee

The financial transactions and business activities of the co-operative
societies need to be continually monitored and properly inspected by the
management.

This is necessary because there is the need to eliminate possible sources
of risk and other dangerous transactions that may make it difficult for
the cooperatives to achieve the set objectives. To ensure a reliable
financial and business transaction for the co-operatives therefore, audit
inspection and inquiry committee is put in place. This committee,
according to the provision of the bye-law setting up the co-operative,
scrutinizes and inspects the financial records and accounts of the co-
operative society. The regularity of the exercise is dictated by the bye-
law of the co-operative. The report of the committee is eventually made
available to the board of directors at the annual general meetings where

76
CRD 203  MODULES

appropriate decisions are made on the recommendations of the
committee.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, learners were taken through tutorials on the definition of an
auditor, duties and powers of auditors and audit inspection and inquiry
committee. It is believed that information so shared will further sharpen
the knowledge of the learners on the subject matter.

5.0 SUMMARY

Audit and inspection should be occasionally carried out on the co-
operative societies to ensure that all the financial and business activities
of the society are properly scrutized.Timely auditing minimizes the
cases of fraud and inefficiency in the management of the co-operative
societies.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Clearly define the term ,,Auditor
2. Enumerate and discuss the duties and powers of auditors

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988): Business Management for Co-operative
        Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
        Economics, University of Ibadan.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999): General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates. p115.

         77
CRD 203                     COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 4 PROCEDURES           FOR                  AUDITOR'S
               APPOINTMENT

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Who an auditor is
        3.2 Appointment of Auditors
        3.3 Termination of Auditors Appointment
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

The financial and other transactions of the co-operative societies need to
be continually inspected. The regularity of this exercise is as dictated in
the cooperatives bye laws. Auditing of the co-operative accounts and
business transactions could be conducted by internal or external teams.
The members of the auditing team must be seen to be above board i.e.
they must be people of impeccable character and are not found wanted
in any way. In this unit therefore, we want to examine the procedures for
the appointment of the auditors.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 who auditors are
 the procedure for the appointment of auditors
 what could lead to the termination of appointment of auditors

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Who an Auditor

Every registered society must appoint an auditor, who must be a
member of a recognised supervisory body and must neither be a member
of nor be connected with the management of the registered society.

78
CRD 203  MODULES

3.2 Appointment of Auditors

The auditor of a newly registered society is appointed by the
management committee to hold office until the conclusion of the first
general meeting at which the accounts are considered. The registered
society in general meeting may also appoint an auditor to fill a casual
vacancy.

In the ordinary way the members appoint the auditor at each general
meeting at which the accounts are considered, to hold office until the
next of such a meeting, that is to audit and report on the accounts to be
prepared for that subsequent meeting. If members fail to appoint an
auditor at the general meeting at which the accounts are considered, the
registered society must, within seven days of the meeting, give notice to
the Director.

The auditor so appointed under the decree holds office from the end of
the 28 days period (or the conclusion of the meeting) until the end of the
time for appointing auditors for the next financial year.

The auditor who is in office when the election is made remains so until
the end of the time for appointing auditors for the next financial year
(unless the general meeting decides otherwise). The auditor in office
when the election ceases to have effect remains in office until the
conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid. When
the election ceases, the auditor remains in office until the conclusion of
the next general meeting at which accounts are laid, or until the end of
the, time for appointing auditors for the next financial year.

Whoever appoints the auditor has power to fix his remuneration for the
period of his appointment. It is usual when the auditor is appointed by
the general meeting. Such remuneration must be disclosed in a note to
the accounts.

3.3 Termination of Auditor's Appointment

An auditor may be removed from office before the expiry of his
appointment by passing an ordinary resolution in general meeting.

An auditor may resign his appointment by giving notice in writing to the
registered society delivered to the registered office. Alternatively, he
may simply decline to offer himself for re-election.

In his notice of resignation or on ceasing to hold office for any reason
the auditor must deposit at the societys registered office either:

         79
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

(a) a statement that there are no circumstances connected with his
        resignation which he considers should be brought to the notice of
        members or creditors of the company;

(b) a statement disclosing what those circumstances are.

On receiving the auditors notice of resignation the registered society
must send a copy of it to the Director. If the auditors notice contains a
statement of circumstances the society must also send a copy to every
person entitled to receive a copy of the accounts.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, learners were taken through the description of the functions
of auditors and the procedures for the appointment of auditors for co-
operative societies. Reasons that may necessitate the termination of the
appointment of auditors were also discussed. Timely invitation of the
auditors to inspect the financial and other business transactions of the
co-operative societies may just be necessary to prevent the societies
from running into avoidable calamities.

5.0 SUMMARY

The procedures for the appointment of auditors have been well
discussed in this unit. Learners should by now be able to understand the
functions of the auditors and the procedures for their appointment.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Who is an auditor?
2. What roles do auditors perform?
3. Discuss the procedures for the appointment of auditors
4. Justify the termination, if necessary, of the appointment of

        auditors

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akinwumi, J.A. (1988): Business Management for Co-operative
         Students and Practising Managers. Department of Agricultural
         Economics, University of Ibadan.

Ihimodu, I.I. (1988):Co-operative Economics: Concise Analysis in
         Theory and Applications. Unilorin Press, University of Ilorin,
         Nigeria.

80
CRD 203  MODULES

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003): Nigeria Business and
         Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999): General Principle of Business and Cooperative
         Law. Soff Associates. p115.

         81
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 5 FUNCTIONS AND POWERS OF AUDITORS

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Functions and Powers of Auditors
        3.2 Types of Auditors
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

As part of internal financial control measures, the co-operative societies
may invite the services of auditors.

The functions and powers of the auditors are clearly stated in the bye-
laws of the society. Details on the limits and mandates of the auditor in
the course of exercising his duties are clearly spelt out. The right to
societys records, receipts of business transactions and other sensitive
documents of the society are clearly stated. The auditor may even invite
any member of staff, present or past, which is considered capable of
providing useful information in the course of performing his functions.
The power to package the reports and make recommendations to the
management of the co-operative society is also included. All these
information are well tutored to the learners in this unit for their proper
understanding.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 know the meaning of auditing in co-operative studies;
 identify the types of auditors in the internal financial management

        of the co-operative societies;
 know the various functions and powers of the auditors.

82
CRD 203  MODULES

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Functions and Powers of Auditors

The statutory function of an auditor is to report to the members whether
the accounts give a true and fair view and have been properly prepared
in accordance with the Cooperative Decree 1993. To fulfill this duty, the
auditor must carry out such investigations as are necessary to form an
opinion as to whether:

(a) proper accounting records have been kept and proper returns
        adequate for the auditor have been received from branches;

(b) the accounts are in agreement with the records; and
(c) the information given in the directors report is consistent with

        the accounts.

If the auditor is satisfied on these matters they need not be mentioned in
the report.

The auditors report must be read before any general meeting at which
the accounts are considered and must be open to inspection by members.
The auditor may also attend any meeting after resigning at which his
successor is appointed and also the meeting at which his office would
have expired.

Auditors have wide statutory powers to enable them to obtain whatever
information they may require for the purpose of their audit. In particular,
they may inspect books and records and call on officers of the registered
society for information or explanations. It is a criminal offence for an
officer of the society to make a false statement to an auditor if it is
misleading, false or deceptive in a material particular and is made
knowingly or recklessly (with indifference as to its truth).It should be
noted that a complete and accurate accounting system is vital for
effective management of co-operative societies. It must produce several
financial statements that are needed in planning and controlling, such as:

a) Monthly and annual balance sheets and operating statements
b) Functional or enterprise accounts pertaining to departments or

        specific lines of business, and
c) Special accounts such as patronage records accounts receivable,

        members equity and patron financing.

3.2 Types of Auditors

An independent auditor is periodically invited to verify the accuracy of
cooperatives business records. This is especially useful to directors in

         83
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

performing their controlling and performing functions. It helps the board
determine the extent to which the manager has followed financial
policies and evaluate how the co-operative is accomplishing its basic
objectives. The external audit is primarily a board tool. Larger co-
operatives also use internal audit reports. The internal auditors primary
duty is to monitor the co-operatives accounting policy. The auditor
checks the cost of prescribed procedures, including their effect on
patrons and personnel, and suggests ways to prevent errors. Usually, the
auditor reports to the chief controlling officer, but sometimes to the
general manager or even to the board of directors. Internal audits are
primarily manager tools.

4.0 CONCLUSION

Here, the importance of the auditor in the internal financial management
of the co-operative societies has been stressed. Types of auditors have
been identified.

Various functions and powers of the auditor have been also been
discussed.

Basically, independent auditors are invited to verify the accuracy of co-
operatives business records. These reports are usually found useful by
the board of directors.

5.0 SUMMARY

Auditors reports are of immense importance to the board of directors in
arriving at accurate decisions on the financial positions of the co-
operative societies. Periodic invitation of the auditors to investigate the
financial positions of the co-operative societies is very germane.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Identify and discuss the types of auditors.
Clearly explain the functions and powers of the auditors in the
management of co-operative societies.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Kennedy. (1983): Economic Theory of co-operative enterprises. The
        Plunkett Foundation for co-operative studies. Oxford, UK.

84
CRD 203  MODULES

Samuel, A.O. (1987): A critical Assessment of Co-operatives Thrift and
        Credit Societies as a source of funds to cocoa farmers in Ekiti-
        East local government area, Ondo state.

Unpublished B.Sc. Thesis. Department of Agricultural Economics,
        University of Ibadan, Nigeria.

         85
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 6 INQUIRY AND INSPECTION OF CO-
               OPERATIVES

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Inquiry by Commissioner
        3.2 Inspection of Books of indebted Society
        3.3 Expenses of Inquiry
        3.4 Procedure for Dissolution
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

In order for the co-operative society to meet its obligations to members
there is the need to continually show interest in the financial transactions
and business activities of the co-operative. Hence, inquiry and
inspection of the cooperative is necessary. It affords the co-operative the
opportunity to detect all areas of risks that are capable of causing failure
for the co-operative in meeting the set objectives. In this unit therefore,
learners are taken through inquiry and inspection of co-operative.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of the unit, you should be able to:

 describe how inquiry and inspection commences
 explain the expenses of inquiry
 discuss the procedure for dissolution of co-operative

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Inquiry by Commissioner

a. The Commissioner may, of his own accord, and shall on the
        direction of the Minister, or on the application of not less than
        one-third of the members present and voting at a meeting of the
        society which has been duly advertised, hold an inquiry or direct
        some person authorized by him writing to hold an inquiry, into
        the by-laws, working and financial conditions of any co-operative
        society.

86
CRD 203  MODULES

b. All officers and members of the co-operative society shall
        produce such cash, accounts, books, documents and securities of
        the society, and furnish such information in regard to the affairs
        of the society, as the person holding the inquiry may require.

c. The commissioner shall report the findings of his inquiry at a
        general meeting of the society and shall give directions for the
        implementation of the recommendation of the inquiry report.

d. Where the commissioner is satisfied, after due inquiry, that the
        committee of a co-operative society is not performing its duties
        properly, he may:-

        i. dissolve the committee, and
        ii. Cause to be appointed an interim committee consisting not

                more than five members from among the members of the
                society for a period not exceeding ninety days.

3.2 Inspection of Books of Indebted Society

The commissioner may, if he thinks fit, on the application of a creditor
of a cooperative society, inspect, or direct any person authorized by him
in writing to inspect, the books of the society, if:-

i. the creditor satisfies the commissioner that the debt is a sum then
        due, and that he has demanded payment thereof and has not
        received satisfaction within a reasonable time; and

ii. the applicant deposits with the commissioner such sum as
        security for the expenses of the inspection as the commissioner
        may require.

3.3 Expenses of Inquiry

It is noted that where an inquiry is or an inspection is made under
section 59 of the co-operative society act, the commissioner may, by a
certificate under his hand, make an order apportioning the expenses, or
such part of the expenses as he considers proper, between the society,
the members or creditor demanding the inquiry or inspection, and the
officers or former officers of the society; and the decision of the
commissioner thereon shall be final.

It is added that any sum awarded by way of expenses under sub-section
(1) of the co-operative society act shall be a civil debt recoverable
summarily on production of the certificate referred to in that sub-section.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 58 and 59 of the co-operative
society act of Kenya, the commissioner may from time to time carry out
impromptu inspection into the affairs of a co-operative society

         87
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.4 Procedure for Dissolution

i. If the commissioner, after holding an inquiry under section 58 of
        the Cooperative society act, or making an inspection under
        section 59 of this act, or receiving an application made by at least
        three fourths (75%) of the members of a co-operative society, is
        of the opinion that the society ought to be dissolved, he may, in
        writing, order the dissolution of the society and subsequently
        cancellation of registration.

ii. Any member of a co-operative society who feels aggrieved by an
        order under sub-section (1) of the co-operative society act may,
        within two months after the making of such order, appeal against
        the order to the Minister with a final appeal to the High Court.

iii. Where no appeal is filed within the prescribed time, the order
        shall take effect on the expiry of that period, but where an appeal
        is filed within the prescribed time the order shall not take effect
        unless it is confirmed by the Minister or by the High Court as the
        case may be.

iv. Where the commissioner makes an order under subsection(1) of
        the cooperative society act, he shall make such further order as he
        thinks fit for the custody of the books and documents and the
        protection of the assets of the society.

v. No co-operative society shall be dissolved or wound up save by
        an order of the commissioner

4.0 CONCLUSION

This unit had extensively discussed inquiry and inspection of co-
operative societies. The provisions of the co-operative societies act (as
amended) of Kenya (2004) were used as a reference point. Learners
should have been properlyinformed about the necessary condition for
the inquiry and inspection, expenses of the inquiry process and the
procedure for dissolution of cooperative societies, among others.

5.0 SUMMARY

Issues that give birth to inquiry and inspection of co-operatives have
been discussed. The inspection of books of indebted society, expenses of
inquiry process and the procedure for dissolution of co-operative society
were discussed. Information shared is expected to increase the
understanding of the learners about co-operative management in
developing economies.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss the circumstances that necessitate the setting up of
        inquiry and inspection of a co-operative society

88
CRD 203  MODULES

2. Explain the procedure for the dissolution of co-operative
        societies.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

The Co-operative Societies Act of Kenya (2004) Amended. No 12 of
        1997 as Amended in 2004.

Adeyeye, S.O. (1978):The Co-operative Movement in Nigeria-
        Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow. Gottingen-Vandenhoech and
        Ruprecht.

         89
CRD 203   COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

MODULE 4

Unit 1   Distribution and uses of Net Surplus in a Co-operative
         Society
Unit 2   Dividend Payment and Interest on Shares of Co-operative
         Societies
Unit 3   Liquidation of Registered Society
Unit 4   Appointment of a Liquidator and Powers of a Liquidator
Unit 5   Arbitration and Cooperative Society
Unit 6   Public Accountability

UNIT 1 DISTRIBUTION AND USES OF NET SURPLUS
               IN A CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETY

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Declaration and Payment of Bonus
        3.2 Distribution of Net Surplus in a co-operative society
        3.3 Maintenance of Reserve Funds
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Most co-operative societies, in an effort to meet their obligations to
members, venture into series of business activities .These activities may
include but not limited to, crop production, marketing, animal
husbandry, construction, service delivery and etc. There could be net
surpluses after sharing the dividend of profits to members at the end of
business year. This net surplus should be distributed according to the
provision of the by-laws of the societies and not indiscriminately shared
out. Proper distribution of the net surplus (in the context of the provision
of the societys by-law) will help the society meet its obligations to
members. In this unit therefore, learners are taken through the ways co-
operative societies distribute their net surpluses in accordance with the
provision of the by-laws.

90
CRD 203  MODULES

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 understand the concept of declaration and payment of bonuses of
        co-operative societies

 be able to explain the ways net surpluses are distributed in co-
        operative societies

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Declaration and Payment of Bonus

i) The provisions of the by-laws usually indicate that every co-
        operative society shall declare each year all the bonuses due to
        members. But where the bonuses are required for re-investment
        by the society for capital development, or for the redemption of
        bonus certificates, the society shall issue bonus certificates to its
        members in lieu of cash payments, redeemable from a revolving
        fund established by the society for that purpose

ii) No co-operative society shall pay a dividend, bonus, or distribute
        any part of its accumulated fund without a balance sheet and
        audited account and report disclosing the surplus funds out of
        which the dividend, bonus or distribution is to be made.

3.2 Distribution of net surplus in a co-operative society

Generally, the distribution of a co-operatives surplus is determined by
laws.

Surplus is determined at the close of a co-operatives fiscal year or as
prescribed by its bye-laws. A co-operatives surplus is not profit in the
usual sense of the word. This excess payment or surplus is considered as
having been returned to the members if the surplus is distributed in the
following manner:

a) Priority goes generally to the reserve fund at least 10 % of the net
       surplus. The reserve fund is meant to stabilize co-operative
       operations and may be used only for investments allowed by the
       code.

b) Priority goes to education and training, which is generally not
       more than10% of the net surplus.

c) Priority is an optional fund, a land and building fund, community
       development fund and any other necessary funds. After all, these
       have been allocated; the remainder is available to the general

         91
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

       membership in the form of interest on his investment and
       patronage refund. Nevertheless, interest in share capital should
       exceed normal rate of return on interest.

3.3 Maintenance of Reserve Fund

According to the provision of the Co-operative Societies Act of Kenya
(amended) 2004, every co-operative society which does or can derive
surplus from its transactions shall maintain a reserve fund.

A co-operative society may carry to the reserve fund such portion of the
net surplus in each year as may be prescribed by rules under this Act or
by the bylaws of the society.
The reserve fund shall be invested in the manner provided for in the by-
laws.

Again, the reserve fund set up under the provision of the by-laws shall
be indivisible and no member shall be entitled to claim a specific share
of it.

Finally, upon dissolution of a co-operative society, the assets
represented by the reserve fund shall be applied in the discharge of the
liabilities of the society.

4.0 CONCLUSION

In this unit, learners have been taken through instructions on the
declaration and payment of bonuses and distribution of net surplus in a
co-operative society. The approach of the societies to maintaining the
reserve funds was also discussed. It is hoped that information so shared
in this unit will be of benefits to the learners

5.0 SUMMARY

The net surplus of co-operative societies need to be properly distributed
so that the return on investment and capital turn- over could further
bring increased yield to the societies investment portfolio year after
year.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Discuss how the net surplus of co-operative societies is usually
        distributed

2. How is the reserve fund of co-operative societies maintained?

92
CRD 203  MODULES

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

The Co-operative Societies Act of Kenya (2004) Amended. No 12 of
        1997 as Amended in 2004.

Adeyeye, S.O.(1978): The Co-operative Movement in Nigeria-
        Yesterday, Today and Tomorrow.Gottingen-Vandenhoech and
        Ruprecht.

         93
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

UNIT 2 DIVIDEND PAYMENT AND INTEREST ON
               SHARES OF CO-OPERATIVE SOCIETIES

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Payment of Dividends and interest on shares
        3.2 Distributable Profits
        3.3 Dividends of Registered Societies
        3.4 Relevant Accounts
        3.5 Infringement of Dividend Rules
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment
7.0 References and Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

This unit discusses Payment of Dividends and interest on shares;
Distributable Profits; Dividends of Registered Societies; Relevant
Accounts and Infringement of Dividend Rules.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 understand how payment of dividend is done and interest on
        shares are distributed

 value the assets of co-operative societies

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Payment of Dividends and Interest on Shares

Dividends may only be paid by a registered society out of profits
available for the purpose: there is now a detailed code of rules which
determines what are distributable profits. This law previously applied to
the rules of registered societies. There are special rules for investment of
registered society fund.

The power to declare a dividend is given by the bye-laws which usually
follow the provisions of the Cooperative Act of 1993:

94
CRD 203  MODULES

(a) The registered society in general meeting may declare dividends
        but no dividend may exceed the amount recommended by the
        directors who have an implied power in their discretion to set
        aside profits as reserves to be used in the business of the
        registered society or outside it in making investments.

(b) The directors may declare such interim dividends as they
        consider justified.

(c) Dividends are normally declared payable on the paid up amount
        of share capital. For example, a share which is fully paid will
        carry entitlement to twice as much dividend as a share 50 kobo
        paid:

(d) A dividend may be paid otherwise than in cash.
(e) Dividends may be paid by cheque or warrant sent through the

        post to the shareholders at his registered address. If shares are
        held jointly payment of dividend is made to the first-named joint
        holder on the register.

A shareholder is not entitled to a dividend unless it is declared in
accordance with the procedure prescribed by the bye-laws and the
declared date for payment has arrived. A dividend is a debt only when it
is declared and due for payment. The directors (as they have power at
their discretion to make transfers to reserves) may decide to withhold
profits and cannot be compelled to recommend a dividend (not to
declare an interim dividend).

3.2 Distributable Profits

The profits which may be distributed as dividend are:

,,accumulated realized profits, so far as not previously utilized by
distribution or capitalization less accumulated realized losses, so far as
not previously written off in a reduction or reorganization of capital duly
made.

The word ,,accumulated requires that any losses of previous years must
be included in reckoning the current distributable surplus. A profit or
loss is deemed to be realized if the profit or loss falls to be treated as
realized in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles at
the time the accounts are prepared. Hence, accounting standards in issue,
plus generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), should both be
taken into account when determining realized profits and losses.

(a) only profits realized at the balance sheet date shall be included in
        the profit and loss account, and

(b) losses which have arisen, or are likely to arise, in respect of the
        current accounting period and any previous accounting period

         95
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

        should be taken into account. In addition, losses which arise
        between the balance sheet date and the date that accounts are
        signed should also be taken into account.

3.3 Valuation of Assets

In so far as depreciation relates to the historical cost of the asset, it must
be treated as a realised loss, and debited against profit, in determining
the amount of distributable profit remaining. But if the asset has been
revalued any increased depreciation provision related to the increase in
value of the asset may be treated as a profit.

An example may help. Suppose that an asset purchased for N20,000 has
a 10 year life. Provision is made for depreciation on a straight line basis
so the annual depreciation charge of N2,000 must be deducted in
reckoning the companys realised profit less realised loss. Suppose now
that after five years the asset is re-valued to N50,000 and in consequence
the annual depreciation charge is raised to N10,000 (over each of the
five remaining years of the assets life). The effect of s. 275 is that
N8,000 of this amount may be reclassified as a realised profit. The net
effect is that realised profits are reduced by only N2,000 in respect of
depreciation, as before.

If, on a general revaluation of all fixed assets (or all except goodwill), it
appears that there is a diminution in value of any one or more assets,
than any related provision(s) need not be treated as a realised loss. Such
a revaluation need not be recorded in the financial statements but need
only be considered.

However, a note must be inserted in the accounts to the effect that the
directors have considered the value of the fixed assets of the company
without actually revaluing all those assets and that they are satisfied that
the aggregate value of those assets at the time was no less than their
aggregate book value.

If there is no record of the original cost of an asset the directors may use
whatever is the earliest available record of its value. If it is uncertain
whether a profit or loss of any previous year was realised or unrealised
they may treat any such profit as realised and any such loss as
unrealised.

If a company shows development expenditure as an asset in its accounts
it must usually be treated as a realised loss.

96
CRD 203  MODULES

3.4 Relevant Accounts

The question whether a company has profits from which to pay a
dividend is determined by reference to its ,,,,relevant accounts which are
generally the latest audited annual accounts. Relevant accounts must be
properly prepared in accordance with the requirements of the General
Accounting Practice.

If the auditor has qualified his report on the accounts he must also state
in writing whether, in his opinion, the subject matter of his qualification
(if it relates to statutory accounting requirements) is material in
determining whether the dividend may be paid.

A registered society may produce interim accounts if the latest annual
accounts do not disclose a sufficient distributable profit to cover the
proposed dividend.

It may also produce initial accounts if it proposes to pay a dividend
during its first accounting reference period or before its first accounts
are laid before the company in general meeting. These accounts may be
unaudited.

3.5 Infringement of Dividend Rules

If a dividend is paid otherwise than out of distributable profits the
society, the directors and the shareholders may be involved in making
good the unlawful distribution.

Any member of the registered society may apply to the court for an
injunction to restrain the company from paying an unlawful dividend. A
resolution passed in general meeting to approve it is invalid and it does
not relieve the directors of their liability.

The Registered Society Management Committee is entitled to recover an
unlawful distribution from its members if at the time of receipt they
knew or had reasonable grounds for knowing that it was unlawful. If
only part of the dividend is unlawful, if it exceeds the distributable
profits by a margin, it is only the excess which is recoverable. If a
member knowingly receives an improperly paid dividend a derivative
action cannot be brought by him against the directors.

The initiative in payment of dividends rests with the management team
since it is they who either recommend to members in general meeting
that a dividend should be declared or they declare interim dividends (if
authorised to do so).

         97
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Moreover the accounts sent to shareholders are prepared by or under the
supervision of management team and are approved and signed by them.
Accordingly the management teams are liable to make good to the
society the amount unlawfully distributed as dividend if they caused an
unlawful dividend to be paid in any of the following ways:

4.0 CONCLUSION

The reward expected by shareholders for investing in share capital is a
dividend. This unit has demonstrated the various rules which have been
evolved to ensure that dividends are only paid out of profits available for
the purpose. Together they comprise additional safeguards for the
maintenance of capital.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we have discussed:

 Payment of dividends and interest on shares
 Distributable profits;
 Dividends of registered societies;
 Relevant accounts and
 Infringement of dividend

6.0 TUTOR- MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. What are the rules governing distribution of profits and payment
        of dividends in a registered society?

2. Describe the relevant accounts of a registered society and list the
        penalties for infringement of dividend rules.

7.0 REFERENCES AND FURTHER READINGS

Akintunde, E. (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers. Cap 90 of
        the 1990 Laws of the Federation

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates.

98
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 3 LIQUIDATION OF REGISTERED SOCIETY

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Method of Dissolution
        3.2 Liquidation
        3.3 Insolvency Practitioner
        3.4 Qualification of a Liquidator
        3.5 Duties of Liquidator
        3.6 Common Features of all Types of Liquidation
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

A registered society like, a cooperative society, is an artificial person
and could be would up or liquidated in accordance with the provision of
the Cooperative Society Law Cap. of 1993 Laws of the Federation.

In this unit, you will learn about the methods of dissolution of a
cooperative society, what is meant by liquidation, the types of
liquidation, powers of a liquidator and the duties of a liquidator.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 explain the meaning of compulsory and voluntary liquidation of a
        cooperative society;

 state and discuss the powers of a liquidator;
 list the duties of a liquidator.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Method of Dissolution

Dissolution occurs when a cooperative societys name is removed from
the register of cooperatives. At this point, it ceases to exist, it has no

         99
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

capacity and the relationship between the cooperative society and its
members is at an end.

3.2 Liquidation

Dissolution of cooperative society follows liquidation or winding up
(the terms are often used synonymously). This means that the
cooperative society must be dissolved and its affairs "wound up" or
brought to an end. The asset are realised, debts are paid out of the
proceeds, and any surplus amounts are returned to members.

Liquidation leads to dissolution of the registered society. The members
of a registered society may within two months from the date of an order
made under subsection (2) or of this section appeal against the order to
the Minister or Commissioner of Cooperatives, as the case may be, for a
decision of the order. The court may also rescind the decision and order
the registered society back to the register.

There are a number of ways in which cooperative society may be
liquidated. They are:

(a) by the Director, under section 38 (1) of the Cooperative Laws;
(b) by an order of the court if the number of members have fallen

        below the mandatory number;
(c) by cancellation of registration of judicial review by the Attorney

        General. This may be invoked if the Director has erroneously
        registered a cooperative society with illegal objects;
(d) on completion of a compulsory liquidation; and
(e) on completion of a voluntary liquidation.

Most dissolution is as a result of liquidation. However, methods above is
often used by the Director suspects that in a cooperative society, the
number of the members of the society has been reduced to less than ten
or in case of an industrial society, to less than six. This is referred to
compulsory liquidation.

Also, section 38 (2) the Director, after holding or making an inquiry or
conducting an inspection under section 37 of the Cooperative Laws of
the Federal Republic of Nigeria or on receipt of an application made not
less than three quarter (¾) of the members of a registered society, is of
the opinion that the registered society ought to be dissolved, he may
make an order in writing for the cancellation of the registration of the
society.

100
CRD 203                                                   MODULES

Even though a cooperative societys name is struck off the register under
section 38 of the Act, any liability of the members living or dead
continues and may be enforced as if no dissolution has taken place.

3.2.1    Compulsory Liquidation

A registered society may, however, be obliged to wind up by
compulsory liquidation or ordered by the court on a petition usually
presented by a creditor or members. The Director may also by an order
in writing cancel the registration of a registered society on application of
¾ of members of the registered society after causing an enquiry to be
made.

3.2.2 Voluntary Liquidation

Dissolution or liquidation that brings the business of a cooperative
society to an end through the decision of the members is referred to as
voluntary liquidation.

Liquidation begins with a final decision to liquidate. If the members in a
general meeting resolve to wind up the registered society that is
voluntary liquidation (winding up). This may be either a member or a
creditors voluntary winding up, depending on Management
Committees believe or the Director that the registered society will or
will not be able to pay its debt in full.

Voluntary liquidation is simpler, quick and less expensive; it is possible
only if a majority of votes cast in a general meeting on a resolution to
liquidate.

Whether liquidation is voluntary or compulsory, it is the hand of the
liquidator who takes over control of the registered society from the
Director.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

Identify the ways registered society could be dissolved.

3.3 Insolvency Practitioner

It is only the court or the Director that can give an order winding up a
registered society. The society then ceases to exist from the date of wind
up and all rights conferred under the law is now vested in a liquidator
appointed by the Director for the society. It is important to note that the
office of a Liquidator must now be filled by authorised insolvency
practitioner.

                                                          101
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.4 Qualifications of a Liquidator

The person to be appointed as a liquidator:

(a) must be fit and proper;
(b) must be up to the required standard in respect of education and

        practical training, and experience received as a liquidator;
(c) he must not been discharged bankrupts;
(d) must not be a mentally ill-person.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

Explain the term ,,Liquidator of a registered society.

3.5 Duties of Liquidator

Given the wide powers invested in a liquidator, he has certain duties.
These statutory duties include the following:

1. He reports to the Director;
2. He acts within the limit of the powers granted him by the

        Director;
3. He maintains a record of the names of all members of the

        registered society both dead or living;
4. He must exercise discretion in the application of his powers.

        Although he may delegate a clerical task and those which he
        cannot perform personally (for which he can appoint agents), a
        liquidator cannot delegate his duty to clerical office to use his
        judgement;
5. He stands in fiduciary relationship to the registered society, its
        credits and contributors;
6. He must cooperate with the Director;
7. He must cooperate with the official receiver;
8. He must act quickly in carrying out his duties and not delay;
9. He must keep minutes of the proceedings and resolution of
        creditors, contributors and liquidation committee meeting;
10. He must keep records of proceedings.
11. He must keep a record of all receipts and payments.

3.6 Common Features of all Types of Liquidator

Liquidation may begin in different ways and different procedures; it
should however be noted that the working procedure is much the same
in every type of liquidation. In the same vein, in every type of
liquidation of a registered society, the same problems can arise.

102
CRD 203  MODULES

(a) Liquidators actions are valid even if the appointment or
        qualification are defective;

(b) No further dealing or change of membership will be permitted
        (unless the court sanctions a rectification or other change);

(c) All monies, orders, letters and other documents of the
        deregistered society must state prominently that the registered
        society is in liquidation;

(d) The Directors power to manage ceases, but the liquidation is
        done under his direction.

4.0 CONCLUSION

We have seen the importance of distinguishing between types of
liquidation and also between liquidation and dissolution. Some of the
procedural steps to take when or how a liquation commence or proceed
were also discussed.

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, you learned about the following:

 dissolution of a registered society;
 methods of liquidation;
 liquidation;
 appointment of a liquidator;
 duties of a liquidator;
 common features in all types of liquidation.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. How far may a liquidator delegates its powers?
2. Describe how a registered society can be dissolved.
3. What event would occur in making a liquidation decision?

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers.
        Cooperative Society Decree 90 of 1993.

Nigeria Law Digest (2006). Lexis Nexis Publishers.

         103
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates.

104
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 4 APPOINTMENT OF A LIQUIDATOR AND
               POWERS OF A LIQUIDATOR

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Provisional Liquidator
        3.2 Effect of an Order for Compulsory Liquidation
        3.3 Voluntary Liquidation

                3.3.1 Members Voluntary Liquidation
                3.3.2 Creditors Voluntary Liquidation
        3.4 The Effect of Voluntary Winding up
        3.5 The Liquidation Committee
        3.6 Contributories
        3.7 Powers of a Liquidator
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

In this unit, you will continue with the study of liquidation and this will
take you through to compulsory liquidation, provisional liquidator,
effects of an order for compulsory liquidation, voluntary liquidation,
effects of voluntary winding up, the liquidation committee and
contributories.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 Define compulsory and voluntary liquidation
 State the effect of an order for compulsory liquidation
 List out the effect of voluntary winding up
 Discuss the role of liquidation committee
 Explain the powers inherent in a liquidator.

         105
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Compulsory Liquidation

A petition presented by three fourths (¾) of the members of a registered
society to the Director of Cooperative Society specifying one of the five
grounds for compulsory winding up or by a Creditor of the registered
society is enough to compulsorily liquidate the society. The five grounds
are as follows:

(a) The registered society has passed a special resolution that it
        should be wound up by the court;

(b) The number of members of the society has been reduced to below
        the required number;

(c) The registered society is unable to pay its debts;
(d) The court considers that it is just and equitable to wind up the

        society; and
(e) The registered society is being used for an illegal purpose.

Petition for compulsory winding up are most often presented by
creditors who cannot obtain payment of the debt owed to them. Three-
quarter (¾) members who have sufficient grounds of dissatisfaction
could present a petition on the just and equitable grounds.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

Mention and explain four grounds for compulsory winding up of a
registered society.

A creditor who petitions on the grounds of a registered societys
insolvency may rely on any of the following situations to show that the
registered society is insolvent. A creditor must be able to show by proof
that:

(i) the registered society is not able to pay its debts as they fall due ­
        the commercial insolvency test;

(ii) the assets are less than its liabilities ­ the balance sheet test.

3.2 Provisional Liquidator

Once the court has been petitioned, a provisional liquidator may be
appointed by the court. The official receiver is usually appointed and his
powers are conferred by the court. These powers usually extend to
taking control of the registered society property and applying for a
Special Manager to be appointed.

106
CRD 203  MODULES

3.3 Effects of an Order for Compulsory Liquidation

The effects of the order, which may be made sometime after a
provisional liquidator is appointed, are as follows:

(1) The official receiver becomes the liquidator;
(2) The liquidation is deemed to have commenced at that time;
(3) Any disposition of the registered society property and any

        transfer of its shares subsequent to the commencement of
        liquidation is void unless the court orders otherwise;
(4) Any legal proceedings in progress against the society are halted.

The assets of the registered society may remain as the legal property of
the registered society but under the liquidators control unless the court
by order vests the assets in the liquidator.

3.4 Voluntary Liquidation

There are two types of voluntary liquidation ­ a members  voluntary
winding up, where the registered society is solvent and members merely
decides to "kill it off" and a creditors voluntary winding up, where the
society is insolvent or there is dispute between the members of the
management committee and members resolve to wind up in consultation
with the creditors.

3.4.1 Members Voluntary Liquidation

The type of resolution to be passed varies with the circumstances of the
case at hand.

(a) If the bye-laws of a registered society provides for liquidation at
        the end of a specified period or on the happening of an event, say,
        the completion of the transaction for which the society was
        formed, an ordinary resolution (referring to the bye-laws) suffice.
        This is however rare.

b) A society may, by extraordinary resolution, resolve to wind up
        because it cannot, by reason of its liabilities, continue in business.

(c) A society may, by a petition signed by ¾ i.e. three-fourths of the
        members of a registered society forwarded to the Director resolve
        to wind up the society.

(d) The Director, after causing investigation to be made into the
        affairs of a registered society, is satisfied can by a written notice
        wind up the society.

         107
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

Mention and explain three effects of the order of compulsory winding up
of a registered society.

3.4.2 Creditors Voluntary Liquidation

To commence a creditors winding up, the management committee
convenes a general meeting of members to pass an extraordinary
resolution. They must also convene the meeting of the creditors.

The meeting of the members is held first and the usual business
transaction is as follows:

(a) to resolve to wind up;
(b) to appoint a liquidator; and
(c) to nominate up to five or more representatives of the liquidation

        committee.

The creditors meeting should preferably be convened on the same day
or at a later date. The meeting may nominate a liquidator and members
of the liquidation committee. If the creditors nominate a different person
to be liquidator, their choice prevails over the nomination by the
members. The creditors may decide not to appoint a liquidator at all.
They cannot be compelled to appoint a liquidator and if they do fail to
appoint one, it will be the members nominee who will take the office.
The effect of the voluntary winding up being a creditors one is that the
creditors have a decisive influence on the conduct of the liquidation.
This is reasonable since it is assumed that a registered society is unable
to pay its debts in full. The remaining assets will therefore be realised
for the benefit of the creditors and the members may get nothing.

3.5 The Effect of Voluntary Winding Up

The main differences in legal consequences between a compulsory and
voluntary winding up are as follows:

(a) a voluntary winding up commences on the day when the
        resolution to wind up is passed. It is not retrospective;

(b) the official receiver plays no role in a voluntary winding up. The
        members or creditors select and appoint the liquidator and he is
        not an officer of the court; and

(c) there is no automatic stay of legal proceedings against the
        registered society nor are previous disposition or seizure of its
        asset void in a voluntary winding up.

108
CRD 203  MODULES

3.6 The Liquidation Committee

A liquidation committee may be appointed in a compulsory liquidation
and in a creditors voluntary liquidation. It usually comprises an equal
number of representatives of members and of creditors. The general
function of the committee is to work with the liquidator, to supervise his
accounts, to approve the exercise of certain of his statutory powers and
to fix his remuneration.

3.7 Contributories

Every person who is a member of the registered society at the
commencement of winding up and every past member is, in principle,
liable to contribute to the registered societys asset whatever may be
required to enable it pay its debts in full. Present and past members
even dead members are therefore called upon to contribute. Members of
a registered cooperative society cannot contribute more than his shares
in the registered society.

3.8 Powers of a Liquidator

In order to perform his functions satisfactorily, the liquidator is given
certain powers. His functions are to realise the registered societys asset
to pay of its debts.

(1) All liquidators may withhold or invoke the relevant sanction;
(2) Pay any class of creditors in fully;
(3) Make compromise or arrangement with creditors;
(4) Compromise any debt or questions relating to assets;
(5) Take security;
(6) Bring or defend legal proceedings (without sanction in a

        voluntary liquidation).

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

What are the powers of a liquidator?

4.0 CONCLUSION

We have seen the importance of distinguishing between types of
liquidation and also between liquidation and dissolution. The unit
contains most of the procedural information which you need to know on
how liquidation commences and proceeds.

         109
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, you learnt about the powers and duties of a liquidator,
compulsory and voluntary liquidation, the liquidation committee,
members voluntary and creditors voluntary liquidation.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. What accounting record must a liquidator keep?
2. What are the main powers of a liquidator?

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers.
         Cooperative Society Decree 90 of 1993.

Nigeria Law Digest (2006). Lexis Nexis Publishers.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
         Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
         Law. Soff Associates.

110
CRD 203                                          MODULES

UNIT 5 ARBITRATION      AND                      COOPERATIVE
               SOCIETY

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Disputes Requiring Arbitration in a Registered Society
        3.2 Arbitration Defined
        3.3 Disputes that can be referred to Arbitration
        3.4 Parties to agreement to Arbitrate
        3.5 Persons Bound by the Agreement
        3.6 Arbitration in Cooperative Society
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor-Marked Assignment
7.0 References/Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Conflict is inherent in any human organisation and as such occurred in a
registered society. There have been some statutory provisions for
dispute settlement where it touches the business of a registered society.
In this unit, you will learn to define the concept of alternative dispute
resolution in respect of a cooperative society. You will also learn to
know who an arbitrator is, his qualifications, powers and his activities as
it concerns a registered society.

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 define the concept of alternative dispute resolution in respect of a
        registered society;

 describe an arbitrator;
 list out the qualifications and powers of an arbitrator; and
 discuss the activities of an arbitrator as it concerns a registered

        society.

                                                                    111
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Disputes Requiring Arbitration in a Registered Society

Section 49 (1) of the Cooperative Law of 1990 states that "if a dispute
touching the business of a registered society arises:

(a) among present or past members and person claiming through
        present or past members and deceased members; or

(b) between a present, past or deceased member and the society, its
        committee or any office, agent or servant of the society;

(c) between the society and any other committee and any office,
        agent or servant of the society; or

(d) between the society and any other registered society; the dispute
        shall be referred to the Director for settlement.

Section 49 (2) state that "a claim by a registered society for any debt or
demand due to it from a member or nominee, heir or estate of a deceased
member, shall be deemed to be a dispute touching the business of the
society within the meaning of subsection (c) of section 49.

3.2 Arbitration Defined

An arbitration is the reference of a dispute or difference between not less
than two parties for determination, after hearing both sides in a judicial
manner, by a person or persons other than a court of competent
jurisdiction. A person or persons to whom a reference to arbitration is
made is called an Arbitrator or Arbitrators as the case may be. His or
their decision is called an award. One or more arbitrators may be
constituted into an arbitral tribunal. The decision of such a tribunal is
also called an award.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

Define the term Arbitration.

3.3 Disputes that can be referred to Arbitration

It is not every dispute or differences that can be referred to arbitration.
Disputes that can be referred must be justiciable issues which can be
tried as a civil matter. They must be dispute that can be compromised by
way of accord and satisfaction. These include all matters in dispute
about any real or personal property, disputes as to whether a contract has
been breached by either party thereto.

112
CRD 203  MODULES

However, disputes arising out of illegal transaction cannot be referred;
also an award arising from such a reference cannot be enforced and may
be set aside. Disputes arising out of void transaction, such as wagering
and gaining contracts, cannot be referred. An indictment for an act of a
public nature cannot be referred. It is a settled policy of the law that an
arbitrator should not be empowered to settle a criminal charge which is a
matter of public concern.

3.4 Parties to Agreement to Arbitrate

The capacity to enter into an agreement to arbitrate is a coexistence with
the capacity to contract. Consequently, every person who is capable of
entering into a contract may be a party to an arbitration agreement.
Conversely, a person who has no capacity to contract cannot enter into
an arbitration agreement.

A corporation aggregate may be a party to an arbitration agreement in
the same way as a natural person. But for other agreements to be valid, it
must be in conformity with the rules which normally regulate
transactions by the corporation.

3.5 Persons Bound by the Agreement

Parties to the agreement are of course bound by it. If the subject of the
reference is assignable, the assignee of a party is bound. A third party,
who is not a party to the arbitration agreement or an assignee of such a
party cannot impose himself on the proceeding.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISE

Identify the nature of disputes that can be referred to arbitration in a
cooperative society.

3.6 Arbitration in Cooperative Society

The arbitration/award involving a cooperative society is final.

4.0 CONCLUSION

The question which is often asked is why do parties, particularly in the
business world, sometimes prefer arbitration to litigation in the ordinary
courts of the land. The answer is that arbitration can be quicker than
litigation. A court action involves conformity with laid down procedure,
which cannot be circumvential by the parties and this takes time. The
decision of an arbitral tribunal is final and binding on the parties.
Consequently, an arbitral award is not subject to appeal.

         113
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we learnt about the definition of arbitration, arbitration laws
in Nigeria as it applies to cooperative societies, the importance and
advantage of arbitration in cooperative societies.

6.0 TUTOR-MARKED ASSIGNMENT

Arbitral award involving a cooperative society and its members is final
and not subject to appeal. Comment.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akaki, E.O. (Ed.) (1992). Essays on Company Law, University of Lagos
        Press (for Department of Commercial and Individual Law)
        Unilag.

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers. Cap 59
        Law of the Federation, 1990.

Cooperative Society Decree 90 of 1993 (1990). Laws of the Federation.

Ezejiofor, Gaius (2005). The Law of Arbitration in Nigeria. Longman
        Publishers.

Orojo, J.O. (1992). Company Law and Practice in Nigeria. Third
        edition. Mmbeji V. Associate Nigeria Limited at page 2.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates.

114
CRD 203  MODULES

UNIT 6 PUBLIC ACCOUNTABILITY

CONTENTS

1.0 Introduction
2.0 Objectives
3.0 Main Content

        3.1 Accountability
        3.2 Contents of Accounting Records
        3.3 Annual Accounts
        3.4 The Auditor
4.0 Conclusion
5.0 Summary
6.0 Tutor Marked Assignment
7.0 References and Further Readings

1.0 INTRODUCTION

This unit will discuss the following topics:

(i) Accountability
(ii) Contents of Accounting Records
(iii) Annual Accounts
(vi) The Auditor

2.0 OBJECTIVES

At the end of this unit, you should be able to:

 discuss accountability;
 list the contents of accounting records;
 describe the annual accounts; and
 discuss the position of auditor in a registered society.

3.0 MAIN CONTENT

3.1 Accountability

This will be discussed on under two sub-heads namely: Public
Accountability and Internal Accountability.

3.1.1 Public Accountability

It is a basic principle of company law that the advantages of trading
through a separate corporate body (especially if its members have

         115
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

limited liability for its debt) should be matched by requiring the
registered society to provide information about itself which is available
to the public. Anyone who is interested in a company, typically because
he intends to do business with it and perhaps to give it credit, can thus
find out who owns and manages it and when is its financial position at
the date of its latest accounts.

The basic sources of information about a Nigerian Cooperative Societies
are as follows:

(a) Its file at the Director of Cooperative Office in which the Director
        holds all documents delivered to him by the society for filing.
        Any member of the public may inspect the file (called ,,making a
        search) on payment of a small fee and may obtain copies of the
        documents in it.

(b) The register and other documents which the registered society is
        required to hold at its registered office (or in some cases at a
        different address in which notice is given to the registrar). Here
        too there are statutory rights of inspection.

Small companies complain that they are put at a disadvantage with their
companies by filing their complete accounts at the registry. This
grievance has been relieved by s. 246 (1) which permits small or
medium sized companies to deliver to the registrar ,,modified accounts
in short form.

3.1.2 Internal Accountability

A different aspect of the requirement that information must be given
exists within a registered society. The management of the company is in
the hands of the directors and they must be accountable to the members.

(a) The members have a statutory right to receive a copy of the
        annual accounts, together with the auditors reports.

(b) Various transactions and interests of the management team must
        be disclosed in the accounts or entered in a register or other
        documents which members may inspect.

(c) Any loans and transactions with the cooperative society in which
        they have a material interest must be disclosed in the accounts.

3.2 The Director of Cooperatives

Certificate of the Cooperative Office File

On first registration, the societys file includes a copy of its certificate of
incorporation and the original documents presented to secure its

116
CRD 203  MODULES

incorporation. Every document delivered to the Director of Cooperative
in compliance with cooperative law is added to the file.

3.3 Contents of Accounting Records

Given the demands on registered societies to submit details to the
Director of Cooperatives and to present accounts to their members, it is
obvious that, in order to do so, transactions entered into by a cooperative
society must be recorded.

A registered society is required to keep accounting records sufficient to
show and explain the societys transactions. At any time, it should be
possible:

(a) to determine with reasonable accuracy the companys financial
        position; and

(b) to ascertain that any balance sheet or profit and loss account
        prepared is done so in accordance with the Act.

Particular records required by the Act are:

(a) daily entries of sums paid and received, with details of the source
        and nature of the transactions;

(b) a record of assets and liabilities;
(c) statements of stock held by the registered society at the end of

        each financial year;
(d) statements of stocktaking to back up the records in (c);
(e) statements of goods bought and sold (except retail sales), together

with details of buyers and sellers sufficient to identify them.
The requirements (c) to (e) above apply only to businesses involved in
dealing in goods.

Accounting records may be kept in the form of bound books or in any
other manner decided by the management team. If another method is
used (such as loose leaf binders) added precautions must be taken to
prevent falsification.

The vast majority of registered societies nowadays keep their records by
means of computers. This ,,non-legible recording is permitted with the
proviso that a legible form (hard copy) can be reproduced.

Accounting records should be kept at the registered societys registered
office or at some other place thought fit by the management team.

         117
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

Accounting records should be open to inspection by the members of the
society. They have a right of inspection of all records, although the court
has no statutory power to compel a society to allow its accounting
records to be inspected.

Where a society fails to maintain the required records, every defaulting
officer is guilty of an offence unless there were honest and excusable
reasons. The penalties for such an offence are imprisonment, a fine or
both.

3.4 Annual Accounts

The basic principle is that the directors must, in respect of each
accounting reference period of the company:

(a) prepare a balance sheet and profit and loss account;
(b) lay before the registered society in general meeting accounts for

        the period.

The information to be given in the accounts, their format and other
matters of form and content are regulated mainly by accounting
standard. There is a requirement that the accounts shall give a true and
fair view, additional data must be given to supplement the statutory
prescribed figures if without those additions the accounts would not give
a true and fair view.

The broad requirements are that the accounts should show:

 a schedule of assets and liabilities;
 a profit and loss account, showing the amount of profit or loss

        before tax;
 transfers to reserves;
 paid and proposed dividends;
 corresponding amounts for the previous year;
 notes on accounting policies and on the balance sheet and profit

        and loss account.

These are the contents of the statutory accounts to be filed and to be
presented to the shareholders.

3.5 Auditor

The accounts must be audited and the auditors report must be attached
to the copies issued to members, delivered to the Director or published.
The accounts must also be accompanied by the auditors report giving
information on a number of prescribed matters. It must contain a balance

118
CRD 203  MODULES

sheet of the development of the business of the society ....... year and at
the end of it, and must state the directors recommendations on the
application, rendition and distribution of profits.

3.5.1 Circulation of Accounts

Each member and debenture-holder is entitled to be sent a copy of the
annual accounts, together with the directors and auditors reports, at
least 21 days before the meeting before which they shall be lad. Anyone
else entitled to receive notice of a general meeting, including the auditor,
should also be sent a copy. At any other time any member or debenture-
holder is entitled to a copy free of charge within seven days of
requesting it.

3.5.2 Adoption of Accounts by Members

The accounts must be laid before members in general meeting. It is
usual to deal with the accounts at each years Annual General Meeting.
But it is not obligatory to do so ­ the accounts may be considered at an
Extraordinary General Meeting (as when the accounts are not ready at
the time when the AGM must be held to comply with AGM rules).

When the accounts are laid before a general meeting it is usual to
propose a resolution that they be ,,adopted or approved. This gives the
members present an opportunity of asking pertinent questions, making
criticisms or suggestions etc. The approval of the accounts is regarded as
a vote of confidence in the directors. If however the accounts are not
adopted they are still the accounts and their validity is not affected. But
to reject the accounts is an expression of members lack of confidence
in the management team. In the face of this storm signal the directors are
well advised to enter into discussions with prominent shareholders, who
may form a shareholders committee for this purpose.

We have seen that every member of a company (and also every
debenture-holder) is entitled to receive a copy of the accounts. But only
those members who are entitled to attend general meetings are able to
take part in the discussion of the accounts.

It is usual to include in the accounts provision for a final dividend to be
declared by resolution passed at the general meeting at which the
accounts are considered.

The auditors are appointed at the general meeting at which the accounts
are considered to hold office until the next such general meeting.

         119
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

3.6 The Auditor

Every registered society must appoint an auditor, who must be a
member of a recognised supervisory body and must neither be a member
of nor be connected with the management of the registered society
(section 36 (1)).

3.6.1 Appointment of Auditors

The auditor of a new registered society is appointed by the management
committee to hold office until the conclusion of the first general meeting
at which the accounts are considered. The registered society in general
meeting may also appoint an auditor to fill a casual vacancy.

In the ordinary way the members appoint the auditor at each general
meeting at which the accounts are considered, to hold office until the
next such meeting, that is to audit and report on the accounts to be
prepared for that subsequent meeting.

If members fail to appoint an auditor at the general meeting at which the
accounts are considered, the registered society must, within seven days
of the meeting, give notice to the Director.

The auditor so appointed under the decree holds office from the end of
the 28 days period (or the conclusion of the meeting) until the end of the
time for appointing auditors for the next financial year.

The auditor who is in office when the election is made remains so until
the end of the time for appointing auditors for the next financial year
(unless the general meeting decides otherwise). The auditor in office
when the election ceases to have effect remains in office until the
conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid.

When the election ceases, the auditor remains in office until the
conclusion of the next general meeting at which accounts are laid, or
until the end of the ,,time for appointing auditors for the next financial
year.

Whoever appoints the auditor has power to fix his remuneration for the
period of his appointment. It is usual when the auditor is appointed by
the general meeting. Such remuneration must be disclosed in a note to
the accounts.

120
CRD 203  MODULES

3.6.2 Termination of Auditors Appointment

An auditor may be removed from office before the expiry of his
appointment by passing an ordinary resolution in general meeting.

An auditor may resign his appointment by giving notice in writing to the
registered society delivered to the registered office. Alternatively, he
may simply decline to offer himself for re-election.

In his notice of resignation or on ceasing to hold office for any reason
the auditor must deposit at the societys registered office either:

(a) a statement that there are no circumstances connected with his
        resignation which he considers should be brought to the notice of
        members or creditors of the company; or

(b) a statement disclosing what those circumstances are. On
        receiving the auditors notice of resignation the registered society
        must send a copy of it to the Director. If the auditors notice
        contains a statement of circumstances the society must also send
        a copy to every person entitled to receive a copy of the accounts.

3.6.3 Duties and Powers of Auditors

The statutory duty of an auditor is to report to the members whether the
accounts give a true and fair view and have been properly prepared in
accordance with the Cooperative Decree 1993. To fulfill this duty, the
auditor must carry out such investigations as are necessary to form an
opinion as to whether:

(a) proper accounting records have been kept and proper returns
        adequate for the auditor have been received from branches;

(b) the accounts are in agreement with the records; and
(c) the information given in the directors report is consistent with

        the accounts.

If the auditor is satisfied on these matters they need not be mentioned in
the report.

The auditors report must be read before any general meeting at which
the accounts are considered and must be open to inspection by members.
The auditor may also attend any meeting after resigning at which his
successor is appointed and also the meeting at which his office would
have expired.

Auditors have wide statutory powers to enable them to obtain whatever
information they may require for the purpose of their audit. In particular,

         121
CRD 203  COOPERATIVE LEGISLATION

they may inspect books and records and call on officers of the registered
society for information or explanations. It is a criminal offence for an
officer of the society to make a false statement to an auditor if it is
misleading, false or deceptive in a material particular and is made
knowingly or recklessly (with indifference as to its truth).

4.0 CONCLUSION

A number of statutory requirements have been examined, all of which
are designed to ensure that corporate bodies (especially limited liability
companies) are open to public enquiry where this is in the public
interest. This is achieved primarily by:

(a) the requirement to maintain registers which can be inspected by
        the public and

(b) the requirement of an auditor

5.0 SUMMARY

In this unit, we have discussed:

 accountability;
 contents of accounting records;
 annual accounts; and

6.0 TUTOR MARKED ASSIGNMENT

1. Briefly define and describe accountability as it relates to a
        registered society.

2. List and explain the contents of accounting records of a registered
        society.

7.0 REFERENCES/FURTHER READINGS

Akintunde, Emiola (2005). Corporation Law. Emiola Publishers.
        Cooperative Society Decree 90 of 1993.

Nigeria Law Digest (2006). Lexis Nexis Publishers.

Owolabi, N.B. and Badmus, M.A. (2003). Nigeria Business and
        Cooperative Law. Printants Limited.

Sofowora, M.O. (1999). General Principle of Business and Cooperative
        Law. Soff Associates.

122
