  NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

       SCHOOL OF POSTGRADUATE STUDIES

                 FACULTY OF LAW

                  COURSE CODE: JIL807

COURSE TITLE: INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE SEA I
        NATIONAL OPEN UNIVERSITY OF NIGERIA

Headquarters

Plot 91, Cadastral Zone,
University Village,

Nnamdi Azikiwe Expressway,JABI -
ABUJA

URL: www.nou.edu.ng

Lagos Office

14/16 Ahmadu Bello Way
Victoria Island, Lagos

Published by

National Open University of Nigeria

Printed
ISBN:

All Rights Reserved
Course Code:    COURSE GUIDE
                        JIL807
Course Title:
                       INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE SEA II

Credit Unit:    3

Course Status:  C

Semester:       FIRST

Edition:        2022
                            COURSE TEAM

Course Developers/Writers:  Dr. Agama Ferdinand O.
                            Faculty of Law

                            NOUN

COURSE EDITOR:              Dr. Austine K Mgbolu
                            Faculty of Law, Ebonyi State University,
                            Abakaliki

Head of Department:         Dr. Ishaya Martins

                               Faculty of Law, NOUN

Dean:                       Ernest O. Ugbejeh
                            Faculty of Law, NOUN
JIL807­ INTERNATIONAL LAW OF THE SEA I  PAGE
COURSE GUIDE

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Introduction
Course Learning Outcomes
Working through this course
Course Materials
Study Units
Textbooks and Reference
Assessment
Tutor Marked Assignment
Final Examination and Grading
Course Score Distribution
Course Overview/Presentation
How to get the most from this course.
Tutors and Tutorials.
Summary
INTRODUCTION
   Generally, international law of the sea regulates the rights of States, international actors as well
   as individuals regarding the use of the seas and exploitation of the resources therein. The
   present legal regimes of the sea, including the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
   Sea (UNCLOS), 1982 set boundaries in the sea, identifying various juridical zones in relation
   to States' jurisdictions.

   Our discussion in this semester commences with the general concept of the sea. It however focuses on
   areas like, the meaning of the sea including the history and sources of the law of the sea. It discusses
   the principles of the freedom of the sea as well as the uses of the high seas, the seabed and States'
   jurisdiction over maritime zone adjacent to their sea coast.

Course Learning Outcomes

   At the end of the study in this unit, you should be able to
           1) Appreciate in general, the concept of the sea
           2) Explain the principles of the freedom of the sea
           3) Understand the jurisdiction of States over the maritime zones adjacent to their
                sea coasts.

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE
   To complete this course, you are advised to read the study units, recommended books, relevant
   cases and other materials provided by NOUN. Each unit contains a Self-Assessment Exercise,
   and at points in the course you are required to submit assignments for assessment purposes. At
   the end of the course there is a final examination. The course should take you about 11 weeks
to complete. You will find all the components of the course listed below. You need to make
out time for each unit in order to complete the course successfully and on time.

COURSE MATERIALS
   The major components of the course are.
        a) Course guide.
        b) Study Units.
        c) Textbooks
        d) Assignment file/Seminar Paper
        e) Presentation schedule.

MODULES AND STUDY UNITS
   The discussion in this course is broken down to 19 (nineteen) study units that are broadly
   dividedinto SEVEN modules as follows ­

MODULE 1: GENERAL CONCEPT OF THE SEA
Introduction
Unit 1: Meaning and Nature of the Sea
Unit 2: History and Sources of the Law of the Sea
Unit 3: Delimitation of Maritime Zones
Unit 4: The Juridical Nature of the Relevant Zones of the Sea

MODULE 2: PRINCIPLES OF THE FREEDOM OF THE SEA
Unit 1: Jurisdiction over the Sea/Ocean
Unit 2: The Traditional Freedoms of Access to the Sea by all States

         Ordinary and extraordinary rights of jurisdiction in time of peace

Unit 3: The Need for or Importance of the Freedom of the Sea
Unit 4: Limitations and Exemptions to the Freedom of the Sea
Unit 5: Piracy, Slave Trade and Freedom of the Sea
MODULE 3: USES OF THE HIGH SEAS AND THE SEABED

Unit 1: Navigation and Fisheries in the High Seas
Unit 2: Exploitation of other Economic resources in the High seas and the Seabed
Unit 3: The Concept of Scientific Research and Experiments in the High seas
Unit 4: Disposal of Radioactive waste
Unit 5: Laying of Submarine Cables & Pipelines, and Mechanical Installations
MODULE 4: JURISDICTION OVER MARITIME ZONE ADJACENT TO THE

                  COAST
Unit 1: The Regime of Ports and Internal Waters
Unit 2: The Regime of the Continental Shelf
Unit 3: Doctrine of Maritime Hot Pursuit and Ship in Distress
MODULE 5: THE REGIME OF THE HIGH SEAS AND SEABED
Unit 1: The Commonage Concept of the High Seas and the Seabed
Unit 2: Fishing Rights and Pollution Regulations

   All these Units are demanding. They also deal with basic principles and values, which merit
   your attention and thought. Tackle them in separate study periods. You may require several
   hours for each.

   We suggest that the Modules be studied one after the other, since they are linked by a common
   theme. You will gain more from them if you have first carried out work on the law of sea.You
   will then have a clearer picture into which to paint these topics. Subsequent units are written
   on the assumption that you have completed previous units.

   Each study unit consists of one week's work and includes specific Learning Outcomes,
   directions for study, reading materials and Self-Assessment Exercises (SAE). Together, these
   exercises will assist you in achieving the stated Learning Outcomes of the individual units and
   of the course.

Textbooks/REFERENCES
   Certain books have been recommended in the course. You should read them where so directed
   before attempting the exercise.

ASSESSMENT
   There are two aspects of the assessment of this course, the Tutor Marked Assignments and a
   written examination. In doing these assignments you are expected to apply knowledge acquired
   during the course. The assignments must be submitted to your tutor for formal assessment in
   accordance with the deadlines stated in the presentation schedule and the Assignment file. The
   work that you submit to your tutor for assessment will count for 30% of your total score.

SELF-ASSESSMENT EXERCISES
   There is a self-assessment exercise at the end for every unit. You are required to attempt all the
   assignments. You will be assessed on all of them, but the best three performances will be used
   for assessment. The assignments carry 10% each. Extensions will not be granted after the due
   date unless under exceptional circumstances.
                                                                                                     8

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING

   The duration of the final examination for this course is three hours and will carry 70%
   of the total course grade. The examination will consist of questions, which reflect the
   kinds of self- assessment exercises and the tutor marked problems you have previously
   encountered. All aspects of the course will be assessed. You should use the time
   between completing the last unit and taking the examination to revise the entire course.
   You may find it useful to review yourself assessment exercises and tutor marked
   assignments before the examination.

COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

The following table lays out how the actual course marking is broken down.

Assessment                 Marks

Assignments 1-4 (the best three of all the Four assignments. Best three marks of the

assignments submitted)     four counts at 30% of course marks.

Final examination          70% of overall course score

Total                      100% of course score.

COURSE OVERVIEW/PRESENTATION

The law of the sea forms the basis for the conduct of maritime commerce critical to our
economy; codifies the rules of freedom of navigation that are essential to national security; and
enables the U.S. to conserve, regulate, and exploit the resources of our neighboring waters and
continental shelf for the benefit of the environment and economy. America's commercial and
military position in the world is preserved by the rule of law at sea. This primer outlines the key
maritime zones agreed to in the LOSC, ranging from internal waters controlled by individual
sovereign States to the high seas where all States enjoy unhindered freedom of navigation. That
discussion underscores a central tenet of the law of the sea, which is the fair balancing of the
desire by coastal
                                                                                                                              9

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE

In distance learning, the study units replace the lecturer. The advantage is that you can read
and work through the study materials at your pace, and at a time and place that suits you
best.Think of it as reading the lecture instead of listening to a lecturer. Just as a lecturer
might give you in-class exercise, you study units provide exercises for you to do at
appropriate times. Each of the study units follows the same format. The first item is an
introduction to the subjectmatter of the unit and how a particular unit is integrated with
other units and the course as a whole. Next is a set of learning objectives. These objectives
let you know what you should beable to do by the time you have completed the unit. You
should use these objectives to guide your study. When you have finished the unit, you
should go back and check whether you haveachieved the objectives. If you make a habit of
doing this, you will significantly improve yourchances of passing the course.

   Self-Assessment Exercises are interspersed throughout the units. Working through these
   tests will help you to achieve the objectives of the unit and prepare you for the
   assignments and the examination. You should do each Self-Assessment Exercise as you
   come to it in the study unit.Examples are given in the study units. Work through these
   when you have come to them
TUTORS AND TUTORIALS
   There are 11 hours of tutorials provided in support of this course. You will be notified
   of the dates, times and location of the tutorials, together with the name and phone
   number of your tutor, as soon as you are allocated a tutorial group. Your tutor will mark
   and comment on yourassignments. Keep a close watch on your progress and on any
   difficulties you might encounter. Your tutor may help and provide assistance to you
   during the course. You must send your TutorMarked Assignments to your tutor well
   before the due date. They will be marked by your tutorand returned to you as soon as
   possible.

   Please do not hesitate to contact your tutor by telephone or e-mail if:
          You do not understand any part of the study units or the assigned readings.
          You have difficulty with the self-assessment exercises.
                                                                                                                             10

          You have a question or a problem with an assignment, with your tutor's
             comments onan assignment or with the grading of an assignment.

   You should try your best to attend the tutorials. This is the only chance to have face to
   face contact with your tutor and ask questions which are answered instantly. You can
   raise any problem encountered in the course of your study. To gain the maximum benefit
   from course tutorials, prepare a question list before attending them. You will gain a lot
   from participating actively.

MODULE 1: GENERAL CONCEPT OF THE SEA

Introduction
The sea has been part of man's concern and consciousness from time immemorial. This is
as a result of the fact that greater part of man's existence and fortune is tied to the sea owing
to the rich resources, both living and non-living which are buried in the seas. The seas are
increasingly becoming more strategic to the survival and sustenance of man due to different
factors. For instance, the increase in the discovery of the presence of these rich economic
resources in the seas and seabed through advancement in technology, growth in world
population and increased economic values of these resources has resulted in an increase in
States' interests and agitations over the rights to own portions of the for purpose of
exploitation and use.
                                                                                                                             11

Unit 1: Meaning and Nature of the Sea

Contents
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Definitions of the Sea
1.3.1 Nature of the Sea
1.4 Importance of the Sea and why Man depends on Sea for Life
1.5 Development of International Conventions on the Law of the Sea in the

        20th century
1.6 Summary
1.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
1.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

1.1 Introduction

The seas have historically played two important functions in support of human life on earth.
First it has been used as a medium of communication. Long before the advent of air travel
and instantaneous communication, through the use of internet, people, goods and services
as well as ideas travelled round the world by ship. In the second place, the vast reservoir
of resources, both living and non-living plays important roles in the survival and sustenance
of lives globally. Both these functions prompted the development of legal rules of the seas
which govern the law of the sea as we have it today. The seas have also long been utilized
as a critical arena for international relations as there had always been struggle for
supremacy and sovereign control over the seas and its resources among the nations of the
world.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Understand and define the term `Sea'
    ii. Relate the Importance of the sea to man
    iii. Appreciate the nature of the world sea.

1.3 Definitions of the Sea
The sea in a simple definition means a continuous body of salt water that covers most of
the earth's surface, especially this body regarded as a geographical entity separate from
earth and the sky. It has also been defined as "the salt water covering the Earth or a large
                                                                                                                             12

body of salt water which is partially enclosed by land. Examples of the seas are the oceans
of the world". (www.Dictionary.com/sea, 2014). It is the large area or body of salt water
that covers most of the surface of the Earth. The sea is the `interconnected system of all the
Earth's oceanic waters, including the Atlantic, Pacific, Indian, Southern and Arctic Oceans'
(Meriam-webster .com: 2013). In some cases however, the term "sea" can also be used for
some specific, much smaller bodies of seawater, such as the Red Sea or the North Sea.

Self-Assessment Exercise

              1. Bearing in mind the improvements in technology and the discovery of the
                  rich economic resources of the sea, outline briefly the benefit/importance
                  of the seas to man.

              2. Explain the nature of the sea

1.3.1 Nature of the Sea
By nature of the sea, we intend here to give brief analysis of the state of the sea as a result
of various activities of man. That is, how sea and its inhabitants behave or react to the
various activities of man that affect its state. Despite the sea's great natural capacity for
self-purification, the health, productivity and biodiversity of the marine environment is
under a serious threat by human activities. For instance, the level of harmful substances
entering the seas has greatly multiplied over the last few decades (C. Schwarte & L
Siegele, 2008). Plastic and synthetic materials form the most common types of marine
debris resulting in the death of sea lives due to injury and or entanglement in or ingesting
these materials in the seas. Marine creatures increasingly show signs of contamination and
damage resulting from sea pollution. Equally, fishing, shipping and other uses of the sea
have resulted in the pollution of the sea additional damage to sea lives, and there is fear
that many species will be lost before they have even been discovered.

Experience shows that fishing activities seem to be posing the most pressing threat to open
ocean and deep seabed biodiversity. Today, harvesting the living resources of the sea has
been transformed into a highly industrialized business reaching even the remotest areas.
Overfishing and the unfettered use of destructive fishing practices have drastically reduced
many fish stocks as well as other marine lives well below sustainable levels. It has been
observed that pelagic longlines, widely used to catch tuna and billfish, also kill hundreds
of thousands of seabirds, turtles and cetaceans. In a quest to catch sparser and more far
flung fish stocks, many fishing fleets have resorted to `bottom trawling', a fishing method
                                                                                                                             13

where heavily weighted nets are towed along the seafloor catching everything in their path
and scraping off the coral cover of seamounts and other sea structures.

Shipping also has tremendous negative impacts on sea wildlife and habitats as a result of
noise, accidental spills of oil or the deliberate, operational discharge of wastes, chemical
residues and ballast water as well as the use of anti-fouling paints. The use of powerful
sonar system in military operations and scientific researches, air guns for seismic surveys
and drilling for mineral, gas and oil exploration are thought to cause heavy loss of marine
lives and disrupt feeding, communication, mating and migration pattern in whales,
dolphins and other ocean-going species thereby distabilising the sea nature. In addition, the
laying of submarine cables and pipelines and large-scale scientific research can also result
in significant disruption of sensitive ecosystems.

It is believed however that the relevant provisions of the various Articles of the United
Nations Convention on The Law of the Sea 1982 has adequately addressed this situation
since the conservation of the seas living resources and marine environment forms one of
the core purposes of the preamble when it stated inter alia:

                     Recognizing the desirability of establishing through this
                      Convention, with due regard for the sovereignty of all States,
                      a legal order for the seas and oceans which will facilitate
                      international communication, and will promote the peaceful
                      uses of the seas and oceans, the equitable and efficient
                      utilization of their resources, the conservation of their living
                      resources, and the study, protection, and preservation of the
                      marine environment

1.4 Importance of the Sea and why Man depends on Sea for Life

The sea greatly supports human life on the earth. For instance, the sea or ocean should be
seen as the world's greatest reservoir of biodiversity, marine mammals, fish, moluscs and
various other species, which are necessary for human existence. It therefore, provides
substantial supplies of food for man such as fish, shellfish, mammals and seaweed, either
caught by fishermen or farmed underwater. Man also uses the sea as a medium for
communication, trade, travel, mineral extraction, power generation and warfare. The sea is
also important in the area of leisure activities such as swimming, sailing, and scuba diving.
In fact, the seas have played crucial roles in the development of virtually every nation of
the world. They provide the marine highways/transportation network that binds man
                                                                                                                             14

together through trade, carrying about ninety percent of nations' imports and exports, and
most world's oil passing through shipping choke points such as Suez Canal and the straits
of Malacca (S. S. G. Borgerson, 2009). As stated earlier, the seas yield much of the food
that feed us. They also serve as laboratories for scientific research and contain such
enormous natural resources that can help sustain and foster economic development of
various nations. Salt, sand, gravel, and some manganese, copper, nickel, iron and cobalt
are some natural resources that can be found in the deep sea and drilled for crude oil. The
seas also shape the planet's weather and climate through redistribution of heat from the
tropics to cooler regions. They serve as massive sinks for carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions,
thereby slowing global warming. Above all today, with the improvements in technology,
seaborne commerce has become the inchpin of the international economy especially with
the discovery of the rich economic resources of the sea and the tremendous increase in the
capacity to explore and exploit them.

In contrast however, the seas are a theater of conflict among nations, an arena in which
traditional navies extend sovereign power, and a frontier where pirates, drug traffickers and
human smugglers take place. In peacetime, the ability of national forces to navigate and
overfly the seas is considered a critical deterrent to conflicts. (S. G. Borgerson, n). These
odds are part of what the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was established
to address.

1.5 Development of International Conventions on the Law of the Sea in the
20th century

The foundation and formulation of the Law of the sea was led by the father of the Modern
International Law, Hugo Grotius Dutch jurist and scholar (1583-1645). The Law of the sea
is a body of international law which governs the rights and duties of States in maritime
environments. Its major concern is on matters such as navigational rights, sea mineral
claims, and coastal waters jurisdiction. Law of the sea is largely drawn from a number of
international customs, treaties, and agreements. However, modern law of the sea derives
largely from the United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea including the 1956 and
1958 Conventions and lately, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
(UNCLOS) 1982, effective since 1994. The UNCLOS has been generally accepted as a
codification of customary international law of the sea, and is sometimes regarded as the
"constitution of the oceans". The doctrine of freedom of the seas was followed for a long
time which limited the rights of the Nations and their jurisdiction only over the narrow belt
of which surrounds the coastline of a Nation. According to the principle, there is this
                                                                                                                             15

freedom by all nations to navigate the oceans in accordance also with the doctrine the open
sea without any regulation. The open sea belonged to all but belonged to none.

1.6 Summary
What can be deduced from the above discussion is that the seas as a large body of waters
play vital roles in the existence and sustenance of human and marine lives. The world seas
are so rich in both living and non-living resources needed for economic development of
the nations. However, the state of the sea is being seriously disrupted due to harmful
activities of man which in turn affect both marine and human lives negatively.

In this unit, we have discussed
    i. What the seas are
    ii. The State/ nature of the sea
    iii. The importance of the sea to man

1.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

    1. C Schwarte& L Siegele, Marine Protected Areas on the High Seas (London: Field,
        2008) p.1.
        <www.citeulike.org/user/highsea/article/2836920>.

    2. S. G. Borgerson, `The National Interest and the Law of the Sea', (2009) Council on
        Region Relations Special Reports N0. 46

    3. Russell, F. S. & Yonge, C. M. "The Seas: Our Knowledge of Life in the Sea and How
        It is Gained", (1929) The Geographical Journal. 73

    4. Bruce C. Douglas, "Global sea rise: a redetermination", (1997) Surveys in
        Geophysics 18

    5. J Harrison, Making the Law of the Sea: A Study in the Development of International
        Law (2011), p. 1.

1.8Possible Answers to Self-Assessment exercise

    1. The sea is important to the life of man on the earth in many ways:
        i. It provides supplies of food to man in terms of fish and mammals
        ii. It is used as a medium of communication, trade and transportations
        iii. Man uses the sea for leisure activities such as swimming, sailing and scuba
                diving
                                                                                                                             16

        iv. More so, with the advancement in technology, the discovery of the rich
                economic resources of the sea has been made possible and seaborne
                commerce has become the inchpin of the international economy.

    2. The question of the nature of the sea tends to analysis the state of the sea as a result
        of various activities of man. It explains how the sea and its inhabitants react to the
        various activities of man that affect its state. Example, shipping and fishing in the
        sea have led to the pollution of the sea and thereby greatly affect its self-purification
        nature. In fact, the health, productivity and biodiversity of the marine environment
        are under a serious threat as a result of various human activities.

Unit 2: History and Sources of the Law of the Sea

2.1 Introduction

Law of the Sea is an aspect of international law which governs the rights, duties and
responsibilities of States with regard to maritime environments (J Harrison, 2011). It
addresses issues relating to navigational rights, sea mineral claims, and coastal waters
jurisdiction. While drawn from a number of international customs, treaties, and
agreements, the present legal regime of the sea derives mainly from the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), 1982 which became effective since 1994,
and generally accepted as a codification of customary international law of the sea, and is
sometimes regarded as the `constitution of the oceans'.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, it is expected that you will be able to:

    i. Relate the history of the law of the sea
    ii. State the sources of the law of the sea, and
    iii. Appreciate the relation between the law of the sea and maritime law

2.3 History of the Law of the Sea

One of the earliest examples of legal codes concerning activities in the sea is the Byzantine
Lex Rhodia, promulgated between 600 and 800 C.E. to govern trade and navigation in the
Mediterranean Sea. Maritime law codes were also established during the European Middle
Ages, including the Rolls of Oléron, which drew from Lex Rhodia, and the Laws of Wisby,
promulgated among the mercantile city-states of the Hanseatic League.
                                                                                                                             17

However, the earliest known promulgation of public international law of the sea took place
in Europe during the 17th century which stimulated unprecedented navigation, exploration,
and trade across the world's oceans. Portugal and Spain spearheaded this movement, laying
claims over both the land and sea routes they discovered. Spain considered the Pacific
Ocean a mare clausum--meaning a "closed sea" off limits to other naval powers, part of
which was to protect its possessions in Asia (L. S Williams, 1992). In the same way, as the
only known entrance from the Atlantic, the Strait of Magellan was frequently patrolled by
Spanish fleets to prevent entrance by foreign vessels. The papal bull Romanus Pontifex
(1455) recognized Portugal's exclusive right to navigation, trade, and fishing in the seas
near discovered land, and on this basis the Portuguese claimed a monopoly on East Indian
trade, generating opposition and conflict from other European naval powers.

So, certain nations, particularly, the Portuguese in the seventeenth century proclaimed huge
tracts of the high seas as part of their territorial domain. These arbitrary claims however
generated conflict and competition especially over sea trade. This ultimately provoked a
response by Dutch jurist and philosopher Hugo Grotius considered as the father of
international law generally who elaborated the doctrine of the open seas, whereby,
according to him, the ocean as res communis were to be accessible to all nations but
incapable of appropriation by any nation. He wrote Mare Liberum (The Freedom of the
Seas), published in 1609, which set forth the principle that the sea was international
territory and that all nations were thus free to use it for trade. He premised this argument
on the idea that "every nation is free to travel to every other nation, and to trade with it (G.
Hugo, 1609). Thus, there was a right to innocent passage over land and a similar right of
innocent passage at sea. Grotius argued that unlike land, on which sovereigns could
demarcate their jurisdiction, the sea was akin to air being a common property of all. `The
air belongs to this class of things for two reasons. First, it is not susceptible of occupation;
and second its common use is destined for all men. For the same reasons the sea is common
to all, because it is so limitless that it cannot become a possession of any one, and because
it is adapted for the use of all, whether we consider it from the point of view of navigation
or of fisheries'.

The freedom of the seas rapidly became a cardinal principle of international law. However,
not all the seas were so treated or characterized as it was permissible for coastal States to
appropriate a maritime belt around its coastline as territorial water and treat same as an
indivisible part of their territorial domain. States under the relevant provisions of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea have the right to exercise jurisdiction over some
maritime zones adjacent to their coast including the territorial Sea, Contiguous Zone,
                                                                                                                             18

Exclusive Economic Zone and the Continental Shelf. So, not every portion of the sea is
free today as Grotius envisaged.

The first attempt to codify and promulgate a comprehensive legal regime of the sea was in
the 1950s, not quite long after the Truman proclamation on the continental shelf. In 1956,
the United Nations held its first Conference on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS I) in Geneva,
Switzerland, which led to the creation of four treaties concluded in 1958. Convention on
the Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, entry into force in 10 September 1964

     Convention on the Continental Shelf, entry into force: 10 June 1964
     Convention on the High Seas, entry into force: 30 September 1962
     Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High Seas,

        entry into force: 20 March 1966

The Convention on the Continental Shelf successfully codified proclamation of Truman as
customary international law. While UNCLOS I was widely considered a success, its
weakness lies in the fact that it left unattended the crucial issue of the extent of territorial
waters. In 1960, the UN organised a second Conference on the Law of the Sea ("UNCLOS
II"), but there was no truce at the conference (M. Thomas, 1978). The unresolved issue of
divergent claims of territorial waters was raised at the UN in 1967 by Malta, making it
imperative the third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea in New York City.
In an attempt to reduce the possibility of groups of nation-states dominating the
negotiations, the conference used a consensus process rather than majority vote. With more
than 160 nations participating, the conference lasted until 1982, resulting in the UN
Convention of the Law of the Sea, also known as the Law of the Sea Treaty, which defines
the rights and responsibilities of sovereign States in their use of the seas.

Self-Assessment Exercise

         1. In succinct form, discuss the principle of non-appropriation of the high
              seas as propounded by Grotius Hugo.

         2. Briefly discuss the various sources of the law of the sea.

2.4 Sources of the Law of the Sea
    i. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982
                                                                                                                        19

The Convention is by far the most known source of the law of the sea. In fact, many
have viewed the Convention as the only statement and source of the law of the sea.
Going by its elaborate provisions, size, scope and universal acceptance as customary
international law which is binding on nations that do not specifically decline to adhere
to the provisions, there is no gainsaying that it is the major source of the law of the sea.
The Convention provides the overall legal framework for the governance of the sea and
codifies such important principles such as freedom of the high sea, rights of states in
exclusive economic zone etc. It is however, by no means the only definitive statement
of the law of the sea as there are also other sources.

ii. International Customs

According to the Statute of International Court of Justice, international custom is an
evidence of a general practice accepted as law and is a second source of international
law. Custom, whose importance reflects the decentralized nature of the international
system, involves two basic elements: the actual practice of states and the acceptance by
states of that practice as law. The actual practice of states (termed the "material fact")
covers various elements, such as the duration, consistency, repetition, and generality of
a particular kind of behaviour by states. All such elements are relevant in determining
whether a practice may form the basis of a binding international custom. The ICJ has
required that practices amount to a "constant and uniform usage" or be "extensive and
virtually uniform" to be considered binding. Also, in the North Sea Continental Shelf
cases, (Federal Republic of Germany & Denmark; Federal Republic of Germany &
Netherlands) Judgment of 20 February 1969), the ICJ observed that the practice in
question must have "occurred in such a way as to show a general recognition that a rule
of law or legal obligation is involved."

iii. Treaties

Article 2 (1) (a) of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties defines a `treaty' as
`an international agreement concluded between States in written form and governed by
international law, whether embodied in a single instrument or in two or more related
instruments and whatever its particular designation. It is an agreement between
sovereign States and in some cases international organisations, which is binding at
international law.

iv. International Agreement
v. These are formal understandings or commitments between two or more

        countries. An agreement between two countries is called "bilateral," while an
                                                                                                                             20

            agreement between several countries is "multilateral." The countries bound by
            an international agreement are generally referred to as "States Parties".

    vi. Juristic writings on the law of the sea and Judicial Decisions

    Pursuant to Article 38(1)(d) of its Statute, the International Court of Justice is also to
    apply "judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the
    various nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of rules of law". It is difficult
    to tell however, what influence these materials have on the development of the law.
    Pleadings in cases before the ICJ are often replete with references to case law and to
    legal literature. The decisions of international and municipal courts and the publications
    of academics can be referred to, although not as a source of law per say, but as a means
    of recognizing the law established in other sources. In practice, the International Court
    of Justice makes reference to domestic decisions although it does invoke its previous
    case-law.

    It should be noted that the rule of stare decisis does not apply in international law. Also,
    according to Article 59 of the Statute of the ICJ, the decision of the Court has no binding
    force except between the parties and in respect of that particular case. Nevertheless,
    often the Court would refer to its past decisions and advisory opinions to support its
    explanation of a present case. The International Court of Justice in a number of
    occasions will consider General Assembly resolutions as indicative of customary
    international law.

2.5 Relation of Law of the Sea with Maritime Law

The law of the sea and the maritime law are counterpart rules both of which are concerned
with the affairs of the sea. Law of the sea is the public law counterpart to admiralty law
(commonly referred to as maritime law), which applies only to private maritime cases, such
as the carriage of goods by sea, rights of salvage, ship collisions, and marine insurance.
Maritime law is concerned with maritime issues and disputes among private parties, such
as individuals, international organizations, or corporations. Maritime law is primarily
concerned and applies to private entities like ship owners, their employees, and any clients
that they may have on board. Many of these laws have been in practice for decades,
developing from various sets of rules and customs. On the other hand, the Law of the Sea
involves more complex rules which govern the activities of States in relation to other
countries concerning maritime issues. Unlike maritime law, the Law of the Sea was
                                                                                                                             21

codified in 1994's United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) but both
maritime law and the law of the sea stem from many other rules and customs.

2.6 Summary
The rule to regulate the activities of states in the sea became imperative as a result of
arbitral, divergent and conflicting claims to portions of the sea by various States. The sea
was thought to subject to appropriation without any regulation that is why the Portugal
claimed a huge track of the sea as part of their territorial domain which claim provoked the
promulgation of the law of the sea by Grotius Hugo wherein the sea was declared free for
all. Although there are various sources of the law of the sea, the law largely derives from
the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. In this unit we have succinctly
discussed the history of the law of the sea and also examined sources of the law of the sea
which include the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, international customs,
treaties as well as international agreements. We explained maritime law which applies to
private maritime cases unlike the law of the sea which covers the public international cases.

2.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

    1. James Harrison, Making the Law of the Sea: A Study in the Development of
        International Law (2011), p. 1.

    2. Thomas E. Behuniak (Fall 1978). "The Seizure and Recovery of the S.S. Mayaguez:
        Legal Analysis of United States Claims, Part 1

    3. The Oxford Handbook of the Law of the Sea. Oxford University Press. 2015-03-01.

    4. The Truman Proclamation and the Rule of Law". Australia's Magna Carta Institute
        - Rule of Law Education. 2016-09-28

    5. G Hugo, Mare Liberum [The Freedom of the Seas] (1609) in Latin, Lodewijk
        Elzevir. p. 7.

    6. Lytle Schurz, William, "The Spanish Lake", (1922) the Hispanic American
        Historical Review, 5 (2): 181­94

2.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
    1. The principle of non-appropriation of the high seas is a doctrine which according to
        Grotius Hugo, the father of international law, states that the sea as res communis is
        open and accessible to all nations and incapable of appropriation by any nation. The
                                                                                                                             22

        sea is an international territory and so all nations were thus free to use it for trade.
        He premised this argument on the idea that "every nation is free to travel to every
        other nation, and to trade with it.

    2. Sources of the Law of the Sea include:
        i. The UNCLOS 1982. This is the foremost source of the law of the sea. The
                UNCLOS has elaborate provisions with universal acceptance as customary
                international law binding also on nations that do not specifically decline to
                adhere to the provisions
        ii. International Customs. The ICJ states that international custom is an
                evidence of a general practice accepted as law and is a second source of
                international law.
        iii. Treaties. A treaty is an international agreement concluded between States in
                written form and is a source of the law of the sea.
        iv. International Agreement. This is a bilateral or multilateral formal
                understandings or commitments between two or more countries.

Unit 3: Delimitation of Maritime Zones

3.1 Introduction
Delimitation is a process which involves the division of maritime zone in a situation where
two or more States have divergent and competing claims. The maritime zones of two States
frequently meet and overlap, which necessitate that the line of separation has to be drawn
in order to distinguish the rights and obligations between the States involved. The sea
generally is divided into various zones as we will discuss in this unit.

3.2Learning Outcomes

At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:
    i. Know and state the different maritime zones
    ii. Explain the different maritime zones
    iii. Gain knowledge and understanding of the rules/principles of delimitation
                                                                                                                             23

3.3 Different Maritime Zones
i. Internal Waters

A nation's internal waters according to the provisions of Article 8 of the United Nations
Convention on th Law of the Sea, means the waters on the side of the baseline of a nation's
territorial waters that is facing toward the land, with the exception of archipelagic states.
Waterways such as rivers and canals, and sometimes the water within small bay are some
of the examples of internal waters and a State can exercise full sovereignty here as over its
land territory.

ii. Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone

In a general usage, the term territorial waters is sometimes used informally to cover any
area of water over which a state can exercise sovereignty such as internal waters, the
territorial sea, the contiguous zone, the exclusive economic zone and potentially the
continental shelf. However, in a narrower sense, the term is used in synonymous with
`territorial sea'. Territorial sea therefore means a belt of coastal waters extending at most
12 nautical miles (22 km; 14 mi) from the baseline of a coastal state. In international law,
territorial sea is that area of the sea immediately adjacent to the shores of a state and which
is subject to the territorial sovereignty of that state. Territorial sea can be distinguished on
the one hand from the high seas, which are free and open to all countries, and on the other
from internal or inland waters, such as lakes wholly surrounded by the national territory.
The UNCLOS regards the territorial sea as part of the sovereign territory of a coastal State
(Art. 2, UNCLOS 1982).

The concept of territorial waters, according to history resulted from the controversy over
the status of the sea in the early days of modern international law during the seventeenth
century. Although the doctrine of open sea later became widely recognised, most
commentators believed that, as a practical matter, a coastal states needed to exercise some
jurisdiction in the waters adjacent to their coast. Two different concepts developed--that
the area of jurisdiction should be limited to cannon-shot range, and that the area should
be a much greater belt of uniform width adjacent to the coast--and in the late 18th century
these concepts coalesced in a compromise view that proposed a fixed limit of 3 nautical
miles (1 marine league, or 3.45 statute miles [5.5 km]) (High Seas, Maritime Law by
editors of Encyclopedia Britannica). In 1793 the United States adopted three miles for
neutrality purposes, but although many other maritime states during the 19th century came
to recognize the same limit, it never garnered such universal acceptance as to form part of
customary international law.
                                                                                                                             24

At the process of time, it became settled that the coastal state can assert full sovereignty
over the belt of territorial sea, together with the seabed and subsoil beneath it and the
airspace above. The universally recognized width of the belt of territorial sea is 12 nautical
miles as set out in Article 3 of the UNCLOS.

In the case of the delimitation of the territorial sea between States with opposite or adjacent
coasts, the Convention requires that none of the States involved should, except there is an
agreement between them to the contrary, extend its territorial sea beyond the median line
every point of which is equidistant from the nearest points on the baselines from which the
breadth of the territorial seas of each of the two States is measured. Article 15 of the
Convention specifically provides that:

         Where the coasts of two States are opposite or adjacent to each other,
         neither of the two States is entitled, failing agreement between them to the
         contrary, to extend its territorial sea beyond the median line every point
         of which is equidistant from the nearest points on the baselines from which
         the breadth of the territorial seas of each of the two States is measured.
         The above provision does not apply, however, where it is necessary by
         reason of historic title or other special circumstances to delimit the
         territorial seas of the two States in a way which is at variance therewith.

[

The contiguous zone is a band of water extending farther from the outer edge of the
territorial sea to up to 24 nautical miles (44.4 km; 27.6 mi) from the baseline, within which
a state can exert limited control for the purpose of preventing or punishing "infringement
of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or
territorial sea". Unlike the territorial sea, the contiguous zone must be claimed as it does
not exist automatically. The coastal states have to exercise the control necessary to prevent
and or punish infringements of customs, sanitary, fiscal, and immigration regulations
within and beyond its territorial sea. In every other respect, the contiguous zone is an area
subject to high seas principle of freedom of navigation, overflight, and related freedoms,
such as the conduct of military exercises.

iii. Bays

A bay is defined as a recessed, coastal body of water that directly connects to a larger main
body of water, like an ocean, a lake, or another bay. A large bay is usually called a gulf,
sea, sound, or bight. A cove is a type of smaller bay with a circular inlet and narrow
entrance (Dictionary.com Unabridged. Random House, Inc.). According to Article 10
(2) of the Convention, `a bay is a well-marked indentation whose penetration is in such
                                                                                                                             25

proportion to the width of its mouth as to contain land-locked waters and constitute more
than a mere curvature of the coast. An indentation shall not, however, be regarded as a bay
unless its area is as large as, or larger than, that of the semi-circle whose diameter is a line
drawn across the mouth of that indentation'.

iv. Habour works and Roadsteads

Harbours and sea works refers to any part of a body of water and the artificial structures
surrounding it that effectively shelters a vessel from wind, waves, and currents thereby
ensuring safe anchorage or the discharge and loading of cargo and passengers. Roadstead
is a body of water sufficiently sheltered from rip currents, spring tides or ocean swell
enabling the ships lie firmly at anchor without dragging or snatching. Roadsteads which
are normally used for the loading, unloading and anchoring of ships, and which would
otherwise be situated wholly or partly outside the outer limit of the territorial sea, are
included in the territorial sea (Art. 12, UNCLOS 1982).

v. International Straits and Waterways

International straits refer to straits which are within the territorial sovereignty of a certain
state, but which are used for international navigation and so are subject to special rules of
international law aimed at securing the rights of passage for vessels registered in foreign
states. It is a strait used for international navigation between one part of the high seas or an
exclusive economic zone and another part of the high seas or an exclusive economic. See
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Arts. 34 ­ 36. International waterways
are the narrow channels of marginal sea or inland waters through which international
shipping has a right of passage. They are straits, canals, and rivers that connect two areas
of the high seas or enable ocean shipping to reach interior ports on international seas, gulfs,
or lakes that otherwise would be land-locked. International waterways also may be rivers
that serve as international boundaries or traverse successively two or more states.

vi. The High Seas

Under the Law of the Sea, high seas include all parts of the mass of saltwater surrounding
the world that do not form part of the territorial sea or internal waters of any nation. It is
referred to as international waters. See Article 36 of the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, 1982. In the past for many centuries ago, beginning in the European
Middle Ages, many maritime states asserted sovereignty over large portions of the high
seas until Hugo Grotius propounded the doctrine of the high seas states that the high seas
in time of peace are open to all nations and no portion can be appropriated by any nation.

vii. The Continental Shelf
                                                                                                                             26

This is part of land territory a continent that is submerged under an area of relatively shallow water
referred to as a shelf sea. The shelf surrounding an island is known as an insular shelf. The
definition of the continental shelf and the conditions under which a coastal State may
establish the outer limits of its continental shelf are outlined in article 76 of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982. `The continental shelf of a coastal State
comprises the seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend beyond its territorial
sea throughout the natural prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the
continental margin, or to a distance of 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which
the breadth of the territorial sea is measured where the outer edge of the continental
margin does not extend up to that distance' (Art. 76 [1], UNCLOS 1982).

viii. Exclusive Economic Zone

This is an area of coastal water and seabed within a certain distance of a country's coastline
as permitted by, to which the country claims exclusive rights for fishing, drilling, and other
economic activities. It is a sea zone prescribed by the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea, 1982 over which a sovereign state has special rights relating to the
exploration and use of marine resources, including energy production from water and wind.
The UNCLOS defined the zone as `an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea, subject
to the specific legal regime established in this Part, under which the rights and jurisdiction
of the coastal State and the rights and freedoms of other States are governed by the relevant
provisions of this Convention' (Art. 55 of the UNCLOS). The difference between the
territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone is that whereas in the territorial sea a coastal
state exercises full sovereignty over the waters, in the exclusive economic zone the state
has a mere sovereign right which refers to the coastal state's rights below the surface of the
sea.

ix. The Seabed and Subsoil
Seabed is also referred to as seafloor or ocean floor and means the bottom of the ocean, no
matter how deep. It is the he solid surface of the earth that lies at the bottom of the sea. The
Convention refers to it as an `Area'. "Area" means the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil
thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction (Art.1 para. 1 of UNCLOS).

Self-Assessment Exercise 1

              1. Identify the need for the delimitation of maritime boundaries among
                  coastal States.

              2. Explain the reason behind the rule of proportionality in the delimitation of
                  maritime coasts

                3.
                                                                                                                             27

3.4 Delimitation of Maritime Zone
The maritime delimitation entails a complicated process because of both the number of real
and potential situations involved, and the complexities of the delimitation procedure
especially in cases like extended continental shelf. The delimitation process itself involves
a number of issues ranging from the source of authority or jurisdiction, the methods by
which delimitation is carried out, to the issue of technical questions regarding the
determination of the actual lines in space (L. M. Alexander, 1986).

Those maritime zones of States frequently meet and overlap, thereby creating the need for
the line of separation to be drawn to distinguish the rights and responsibilities of each State
involved. Delimitation therefore puts limits to the sovereign rights of the States regarding
the exploitation and use of the sea resources. It is worthy of note that maritime boundary
delimitation is an essential precursor to the full realisation of the resource potential of
national maritime zones and the peaceful use management of the seas. Regarding the
seabed resources, which could prove crucial to the economic well-being and political
stability of various coastal States, divergent and overlapping claims hamper development
where maritime boundaries remain unsettled (Prescott V and Schofield C, 2005). This
underscores the need for the delimitation of maritime boundaries in order to forestall
conflicts among States with overlapping maritime boundaries.

Under the international law, delimitation of maritime zones is primarily by agreement
through negotiation. The negotiating process is very important for reaching agreement. The
delimitation process must be effected by agreement between parties on the basis of
international law, as provided by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
1982. Accordingly, Article 74 paragraph 1 of the Convention provides that, the
delimitation of the exclusive economic zone/continental shelf with the opposite or adjacent
coasts shell be effected by agreement on the basis of international law, as referred to in
Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice, in order to achieve an
equitable solution.
On the Delimitation of the territorial sea between States with opposite or adjacent coasts,
Article 15 of the Convention states that:
                                                                                                                             28

         Where the coasts of two States are opposite or adjacent to each other,
         neither of the two States is entitled, failing agreement between them to the
         contrary, to extend its territorial sea beyond the median line every point of
         which is equidistant from the nearest points on the baselines from which
         the breadth of the territorial seas of each of the two States is measured.
         The above provision does not apply, however, where it is necessary by
         reason of historic title or other special circumstances to delimit the
         territorial seas of the two States in a way which is at variance therewith.

The Convention enjoins the State parties to reach agreement through negotiation. However,
where agreement could not be achieved within a reasonable period, the parties are
encouraged to reach provisional agreement pending the final agreement, all in the spirit of
understanding and cooperation. Once an agreement has been concluded and in force
between the States concerned, questions regarding the delimitation of the exclusive
economic zone shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.
See Article 74 (2) to (4).

For the delimitation of the continental shelf between States with opposite or adjacent
coasts, Article 83 of the Convention stipulates thus:

          1. The delimitation of the continental shelf between States with
              opposite or adjacent coasts shall be effected by agreement on the
              basis of international law, as referred to in Article 38 of the Statute
              of the International Court of Justice, in order to achieve an equitable
              solution.

          2. If no agreement can be reached within a reasonable period of time,
              the States concerned shall resort to the procedures provided for in
              Part XV.

          3. Pending agreement as provided for in paragraph 1, the States
              concerned, in a spirit of understanding and cooperation, shall make
              every effort to enter into provisional arrangements of a practical
              nature and, during this transitional period, not to jeopardize or
              hamper the reaching of the final agreement. Such arrangements
              shall be without prejudice to the final delimitation.
                                                                                                                             29

          4. Where there is an agreement in force between the States concerned,
              questions relating to the delimitation of the continental shelf shall
              be determined in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.

It should be noted that the fundamental procedural principle of general application that
forms part of the doctrine of the International Court Justice, as indicated in 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is the principle of effecting maritime boundary
delimitation by agreement. This principle constitutes a special application of the general
principle of peaceful settlement of international disputes which emphasises on State
obligation to negotiate in good faith with spirit of understanding and cooperation with a
view to conclude agreement.

3.5 Legal Principles and Methods for Delimitation of Maritime Zones

The delimitation of maritime boundaries between States with adjacent coasts can be
undertaken using the following principles and methods:

Self-Assessment Exercise 2

          1. Discuss the principle of equidistance

    i. Equidistance
    Equidistance in the wordings of Article 15 of the UNCLOS is defined as "...the line
    every point of which is equidistant from the nearest points of the baselines from which
    the breadth of the territorial sea of each of the two States is measured..." See also
    Article 12 of the 1958 Territorial Sea Convention. The 1958 Continental Shelf
    Convention also defined equidistance in a similar way. This Convention uses the term
    "median line" for an equidistant line between opposite States and refers only to a
    boundary determined by application of the principle of equidistance in the case of
    adjacent States (Article 6 1958 Geneva Convention on the Continental Shelf). The
    understanding here is that the use of equidistance methods depends on the baselines
    along the coasts of the concerned States whose offshore areas are to be separated by the
    boundary. There may be difficulties here if one State utilizes normal baselines,
                                                                                                                        30

following the sinuosities of the coasts, and the other adopts a straight baseline system
connecting the outermost islands, promontories and rocks (L. M. Alexander, 1986).

The 1958 Conventions made the use of the equidistance method obligatory in the
absence of an agreement, historical titles or special circumstances. This was called the
combined equidistance/special circumstances rule. The application of the principle of
distance gives pertinence in normal situations to the equitable method of the
equidistance/median line (N Dundua, 2006-2007). However, notwithstanding the
recognition of the principle of distance as the basis of entitlement to both the exclusive
economic zones (EEZ) and the Continental shelves within 200 nautical miles, the
privileged role of equidistance was seriously objected by the International Court of
Justice (ICJ) and dissenting judges (Barbara, 1988). The privileged status of
equidistance method was diluted by the ICJ and arbitral tribunals, it was considered as
a method which in some cases may lead to inequitable and unreasonable results. In the
majority of cases, it was declared that equidistance was not a binding rule of law, but
merely one method among others and it was not regarded as part of customary
international law which plays the major role in delimitation process. The defects of the
equidistance principle, even tempered by the notion of special circumstances, resulted
in its diminution. The disregard for equidistance method went so far that the terms
"equidistance" and "median line" have disappeared from the wordings of Article 74 and
83 of the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea which provide for the delimitation of
the exclusive economic zone and continental shelf respectively. The principle was
however retained in Article 15 of the 1982 Convention on the delimitation of territorial
sea.

It should be noted however, that despite the diminished status of equidistance, it is still
part of State practice. The majority of bilateral treaties on maritime delimitation still
use a line based on simplified or modified equidistance. In a number of cases,
governments begin the negotiations by considering an equidistance line, which they
may subsequently modify as circumstances may call for (Nelson L.D.M, 1990). Even
in most ICJ cases and arbitral awards, judges found it very convenient to use the
equidistance line as the starting point in the delimitation process. In recognition of this,
Judge Jimenes De Arechaga declared in the 1982 ICJ Continental shelf case
(Tunisia/Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) that "naturally, in all cases the decision-maker looks
at the line of equidistance, even if none of the parties has invoked it." Accordingly, the
point of departure should be the line of equidistance, which should be altered only if it
is found to produce inequitable results.
                                                                                                                        31

The first case came before the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in 1969 was the case
between three adjacent States that is the North Sea Continental Shelf Case (Federal
Republic of Germany/Denmark; Federal Republic of Germany/Netherlands) Judgment
of 20 February, 1969. The case started the demolition of the equidistance principle.
After this case, the principle ceased to be the only and obligatory principle and became
merely one method among others. The parties requested the Court to state the principles
and rules of international law applicable, and undertook thereafter to carry out
delimitations on that basis. The Court rejected the argument of Denmark and the
Netherlands to the effect that the delimitations in question had to be carried out in
accordance with the principle of equidistance as defined in Article 6 of the 1958 Geneva
Convention on the Continental Shelf. The court decided inter alia

      That the Federal Republic, which had not ratified the Convention, was
      not legally bound by the provisions of Article 6;

      That the equidistance principle was not a necessary consequence of the
      general concept of continental shelf rights, and was not a rule of
      customary international law.

While rejecting the contentions of Denmark and the Netherlands, the Court considered
that the principle of equidistance, as codified in Article 6 of the 1958 Geneva
Convention on the Continental Shelf, had not been proposed by the International Law
Commission as an emerging rule of customary international law.

It should be noted that the court refused to adopt this method here because it found the
use of the equidistance line inapplicable in the present case after taken into account the
particular coastal configuration of States concerned. The coasts of Denmark and the
Netherlands were convex, while that of the Federal Republic of Germany was concave.
In such a case, the use of equidistance left Germany an exceptionally small part of the
North Sea Continental Shelf and the delimitation process would not produce an
equitable result.

The Court however, commented that it "has never been doubted that the equidistance
method of delimitation is a very convenient one" and that "it would probably be true to
say that no other method of delimitation has the same combination of practical
convenience and certainty of application".
                                                                                                                        32

The second case brought before the Court involving adjacent States was in 1982,
concerning the delimitation of the continental shelf between Tunisia and Libyan Arab
Jamahiriya. The two parties requested the Court to clarify what are the principles and
rules of international law which may be applied for the delimitation of a Continental
Shelf between two States and during the process to apply equitable principles and
relevant circumstances, as well as recent trends admitted at the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982. The parties further requested the Court to
show the practical way to apply the indicated rules and principles so as to enable the
experts of the two States to delimit those areas without any troubles.

Regarding the use of equidistance, the Court reviewed the developments since the 1969
North Sea Continental Shelf Case involving adjacent States and concluded that:

            Treaty practice, as well as the history of Article 83 of the draft
            convention on the Law of the Sea, leads to the conclusion that
            equidistance may be applied if it leads to an equitable solution; if
            not, other methods should be employed.

ii. Equity and the equitable principle

The notion of equity is at the core of the delimitation of exclusive economic zone and
the continental shelf. Accordingly, Articles 74 and 83 of the 1982 Convention on the
Law of the Sea concerning the delimitation of the exclusive economic zone and the
continental shelf require that delimitation should be effected by agreement, in
accordance with international law and in order to achieve an equitable result.

The International Court of Justice and arbitral tribunals have tried in many occasions to
determine the concept of equity:

          Equity as a legal concept is a direct emanation of the idea of Justice.
          The Court is bound to apply equitable equity as a part of general
          international law. When applying positive international law, a court
          may choose among several possible interpretations of the law the
          one which appears, in the light of the circumstances of the case, to
          be closest to the requirements of justice (1982 Tunisia/Libya case
          Par. 71).
                                                                                                                        33

The Court added further that "it is not a question of applying equity simply as a meter
of abstract justice, but of applying a rule of law" during the 1969 North Sea case, and
later, during the 1985 Libya/Malta case, the court reaffirmed that "the Justice of which
equity is an emanation, is not abstract justice but justice according to the rule of law."
It therefore appears that equity is applied by the Courts as a part of international law
and as a rule of law for the delimitation of the Continental Shelf. In an explanation as
to why the law made equity its own, and perhaps to give it more force, the Judgments
emphasize that law and equity are close because they start from, and give expression
to, the same idea which is the idea of justice. The understanding from the Court's
jurisprudence is that, in disputes relating to maritime delimitation, equity is not a
method of delimitation, but solely an aim that should be borne in mind while carrying
out the delimitation (2002 Cameroon/Nigeria case. Par. 294).

The difficulty associated with the idea of equity is that it does not provide any precise
principle or criteria for the achievement of an equitable result. Regarding the
delimitation of exclusive economic zone and continental shelf, the 1982 Convention
provides only a goal which must be achieved and makes no provisions concerning how
to achieve the result. This impreciseness made some scholars to argue that there is a
loss of normativity in the idea of equity and this idea allows the level of normativity to
rise and fall (Kolb R. 2003). The definition of equitable principles is closely related to
the idea of unicum, implying that geographical features of each delimitation case varied
so greatly that it will be always nearly impossible to posit any fixed principles
applicable for the establishment of maritime boundaries between States. The
jurisprudence of the ICJ and arbitral tribunals has lead significant credence to the idea
of the uniqueness of each maritime boundary.

iii. Single maritime boundary

As a consequence of the establishment of the exclusive economic zone, the trend among
many States is to adopt, in the interest of simplicity, certainty and convenience, a single
maritime boundary to divide their maritime zones beyond the territorial sea. With
regard to adjacent coasts, a line drawn seaward from the coast will usually separate only
the territorial waters of the two States for the first twelve nautical miles. Beyond that,
depending on the agreement between the States, the same may separate the two
maritime zones between them (P. Surya, 1987).
The recourse to the single maritime boundary is supported by the parallelism and
similar character between the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf up to
200 nautical miles. Under the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea, particularly
                                                                                                                        34

Articles 57 and 76, the 200 nautical mile distance criterion governs the attribution of
legal title to both the exclusive economic zone and the continental shelf in cases where
the continental margin extends up to 200 nautical miles. Furthermore, referring to
Article 56 of the Convention, the notion of the exclusive economic zone comprises both
the sea-bed and water column and the provision relating to the continental shelf is nearly
identical to the corresponding rights and duties of States in their exclusive economic
zone regarding the sea-bed resources, artificial islands, and scientific research. The
wordings of Articles 74 and 83 concerning the delimitation of the exclusive economic
zone and continental shelf are similar also. The establishment of the distance criterion
by the ICJ in the 1985 Libya/Malta case as the sole basis of title to the sea-bed and
subsoil within 200 nautical miles equally gives support to the single maritime boundary
between the two zones.

iv. Proportionality
The concept of proportionality plays a very significant role in various spheres of
international law and the law of the sea, and in particular maritime delimitation. Some
rules of international law leave judgment on the legality of an act to the consideration
of the specific situation of the case, and offer only a general notion of the criteria for
evaluation. One of these rules is the concept of proportionality (N Dundua, 2006-2007).
Many judgments relating to the delimitation of maritime zone have taken into
consideration the concept of proportionality. The concept of proportionality explains
that, maritime delimitation should be effected by taking into consideration the ratio
between the water and continental shelf areas attributed to each party and the length of
their respective coastlines. The implication is that, the Court and tribunals have to
estimate roughly, or calculate exactly, the lengths of the relevant coastlines and
compare that ratio to the ratio of the provisionally delimited relevant water and
continental shelf areas. In case the proportion of the relevant maritime zones does not
roughly coincide with the relative length of the coastlines, further analyses or
adjustment would be needed and considered (Charney, 1994). However, the concept of
proportionality was not considered in every ICJ case and arbitration tribunal award.

According to the ICJ in the 1969 North Sea case, there are three geographical features
that would justify having the recourse to the rule of proportionality. These include:

       1) The coasts of the States concerned are adjacent to each other;
       2) The coastlines of the FRG are concave; and

       3) The coastlines of the States abutting on the North Sea are comparable in length.
                                                                                                                             35

The idea surrounding the rule of proportionality was to use it as a corrective measure for
inequitable results in order to avoid an unreasonably inequitable result deriving from
geographical peculiarities of the coasts. Also, it should be noted that the Court viewed
proportionality not as a distinct principle of delimitation, but as one of the means of
ensuring delimitation in accordance with equitable principles, meaning that,
proportionality is a test of the equity.

3.6 Summary
The seas as we have seen in this unit are delineated into different zones majorly for the
purpose of jurisdiction and governance. Although these zones were not sufficiently
addressed in the earlier conventions on the law of the sea (1958 Conventions on the Law
of the Sea Geneva, 29th April 1958) the present legal regime of the sea has carefully treated
these zone with their juridical nature and has provided principles and rules to be followed
in the delimitation exercises. In this unit, we have discussed the relevant maritime zones
and their meanings. We also considered the various methods of delimitation of maritime
boundaries and the disposition of courts in their applications.

3.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

    1. Nemecek, Sasha. 1999. "A Plan for Panama." Scientific American 281"Panama
        Takes Control of its Canal" (2000) Hispanic 13.

    2. Prescott V and Schofield C, The maritime political boundaries of the world, (2005)
        P. 216

    3. Alexander L. M., The delimitation of maritime boundaries (1986) Political
        geography quarterly 5, PP. 1-2.

    4. Nelson L.D.M., "The roles of equity in the delimitation of maritime boundaries,
        (1990) American journal of international law", 84 (4), P. 844

    5. Jonathan I. Charney, "Progress in international maritime boundary delimitation
        law", (1994) American journal of international law, Vol. 88 P. 241

3.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise 1

    A) i. Where the maritime zones of States meet and overlap, delimitation becomes
                important to draw the line of separation in order to distinguish the rights and
                responsibilities of each State involved.
                                                                                                                             36

            ii. Delimitation puts limits to the sovereign rights of the States regarding the
                exploitation and use of the sea resources.

            iii. This is essential to forestall conflicts and ensure the full realisation of the
                resource potential of national maritime zones and the peaceful use
                management of the seas.

    B) The idea behind the rule of proportionality is to use it as a corrective measure for
        inequitable results in order to avoid an unreasonably inequitable result deriving from
        geographical particularities of the coasts involved.

Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise 2

   1. The principle of equidistance is a method of maritime zone delimitation by which
        the line every point of which is equidistant from the nearest points of the baselines
        from which the breadth of the territorial sea of each of the two States is measured.
        This in line with article 15 of the UNCLOS. The use of equidistance methods
        would largely depend on the baselines along the coasts of the concerned States
        whose offshore areas are to be separated by the boundary. Although this principle
        has been held sacrosanct for as the only method of maritime delimitation, it is no
        longer so today as other principles of delimitation have been developed and
        applied by courts.

Unit 4: Juridical Nature of the Relevant Zones of the Sea

4.1 Introduction

The Geneva Conventions on Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone, Continental Shelf and
 High Sea, and the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) adopted
 on 29 April 1958 and 10 December 1982 respectively, have been widely recognized as
 universal legal documents on the seas. These Conventions provide a comprehensive legal
 regime for the international waters and delineated marine space into different recognized
 zones and set out the rights, duties as well as responsibilities of sovereign States within
 the zones. These maritime zones include internal waters, territorial and contiguous zone,
 exclusive economic zone and continental shelf which are to be established by the States.
 The Conventions equally set out the rights and responsibilities of the States concerning
 the management and governance of their activities including protection and preservation
 of natural resource in the zones (M. Ravin, 2005). In addition to this, the States enjoy their
                                                                                                                             37

 rights in the Area and High Sea which are beyond their national jurisdiction, majorly for
 the purpose of exploration and exploitation. We will examine briefly the interests of States
 in these zones and their rights and obligations over these areas.

4.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Explain the juridical nature of the relevant maritime zones
    ii. Explain the power and jurisdiction of the States in the sea zone within their

            territorial jurisdiction
    iii. State the rights and obligations of States in the Areas beyond national

            jurisdiction

4.3 Internal Waters

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, provides that a nation's internal
waters include waters on the side of the baseline of a nation's territorial waters that is facing
toward the land, except in archipelagic states. These include waterways such as rivers and
canals, and sometimes the water within small bays. See Article 8 of the Convention. States
possess equal sovereignty in their internal waters to that which they can exercise on their
land territory. Coastal states are therefore free to make laws with regard to their internal
waters, regulate any use, and use any resource. Except there is an agreement to the contrary,
foreign vessels have no right of passage within a State's internal waters, and this lack of
right to innocent passage forms the major difference between internal waters and territorial
waters (UNCLOS Part II, Art. 2). The "archipelagic waters" within the outermost islands
of archipelagic states are akin to internal waters although in this case, innocent passage
must be allowed but the archipelagic state has the right to designate certain sea lanes in
these waters. When a foreign vessel is authorized to enter internal waters, it is subject to
the laws of the coastal state, with one exception that the crew of the ship is subject to the
law of the flag state.

Self-Assessment Exercise

     1. Discuss the differences between the territorial sea and the
          exclusive economic zone in relation to the coastal States'
          jurisdiction.

     2. Briefly discuss the concept of innocent passage
     3. Who exercises jurisdiction over the high seas?
                                                                                                                             38

4.4 Territorial Sea and Contiguous Zone

The Territorial sea can be defined as an area extending from internal waters to the sea- ward side
which in this present law of the sea extends up to twelve nautical miles. The territorial sea
gradually snowballed from early assertion that the coastal State had special interests in
waters adjacent to its shores for some purposes. With the passage of time, the various
interests in combination culminated into "sovereignty" over a "territorial sea" (L Henkin

et al, 1987). The claim for Coastal States full sovereignty over their territorial sea has been
based on the need to protect their territorial interests against any form of aggression.

The coastal State therefore, in accordance with the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, possesses sovereignty and exercises jurisdiction over territorial sea which
jurisdiction equally extends to the air space above the territorial sea, its bed and subsoil.
Article 2 of the Convention provides that:

                  1. The sovereignty of a coastal State extends, beyond its
                       land territory and internal waters and, in the case of an
                       archipelagic State, its archipelagic waters, to an
                       adjacent belt of sea, described as the territorial sea.

                   2. This sovereignty extends to the air space over the
                        territorial sea as well as to its bed and subsoil.

On the rights and duties of coastal States in the territorial sea Articles 24 and 25 of the
Convention provide respectively as follow:

Article 24 provides that:

                  1. The coastal State shall not hamper the innocent passage
                      of foreign ships through the territorial sea except in
                      accordance with this Convention. In particular, in the
                      application of this Convention or of any laws or
                      regulations adopted in conformity with this Convention,
                      the coastal State shall not:

                  (a) impose requirements on foreign ships which have the
                       practical effect of denying or impairing the right of
                       innocent passage; or

                  (b) discriminate in form or in fact against the ships of any state
                       or against ships carrying cargoes to, from or on behalf of
                       any State.
                                                                                                                             39

                  2. The coastal State shall give appropriate publicity to any
                       danger to navigation, of which it has knowledge, within its
                       territorial sea.

From the above provisions, it is understood that the sovereignty of coastal State over the
territorial sea is qualified only by a right of innocent passage. That is, right of peaceful
transit for merchant vessels of other States not prejudicial to the good order or security of
the coastal state. It is a concept in the law of the sea that allows for a vessel to pass through
the territorial waters of another state, subject to certain restrictions. The right of innocent
passage does not however cover submerged submarines, aircraft, nor does it include a right
to fish.

For a passage to be innocent, the Convention places several restrictions on the vessel
transiting through the territorial sea of other state. For instance, Article 19 (2) of
Convention stipulates that:

       passage of a foreign ship shall be considered prejudicial to the peace,
       good order or security of the coastal state and thus in non-innocent
       passage if, in the territorial sea (less than 12 nautical miles from shore),
       it engages in any of the following activities:

     (a) any threat or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity or
        political independence of the coastal State, or in any other manner in
        violation of the principles of international law embodied in the Charter of
        the United Nations;

     (b) any exercise or practice with weapons of any kind;

     (c) any act aimed at collecting information to the prejudice of the defence or
         security of the coastal State;

     (d) any act of propaganda aimed at affecting the defence or security of the
         coastal State;

     (e) the launching, landing or taking on board of any aircraft;

     (f) the launching, landing or taking on board of any military device;

     (g) the loading or unloading of any commodity, currency or person contrary
          to the customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and regulations of
          the coastal State;
                                                                                                                             40

     (h) any act of willful and serious pollution contrary to this Convention;

     (i) any fishing activities;

     (j) the carrying out of research or survey activities;

     (k) any act aimed at interfering with any systems of communication or any
         other facilities or installations of the coastal State;

     (l) any other activity not having a direct bearing on passage.

It seems that the mere carriage of weapons, locked or stowed, cannot be considered as a
violation of paragraph 2 (b). Similarly, the use of a weapon in a bona fide self-defense
situation against genuine threats of piracy, armed robbery or terrorism would also not
classify as an exercise or practice under this article.

Also, in the modern maritime security context, where a vessel defends itself against bona
fide pirate or terrorist threats that cannot constitute a use of force against the coastal state
because the attackers are hostis humani generis, or enemies of all mankind, and are thus
subject to universal jurisdiction. Consequently, engaging in genuine self-defense against
pirates would not necessarily be a violation of innocent passage.

Establishment of non-innocent passage can be challenging any way. One of the most
challenging enforcement activities for a coastal state is establishing without doubts that a
foreign ship is in non-innocent passage. Some commentators of UNCLOS, specifically
concerning physical and environmental security, believe that actual damage must occur
before a coastal state can declare the passage of a ship in its territorial sea non-innocent.
Where a ship is wrongly accused, the ship or charterer can hold coastal state responsible
for damages.

Article 25 which stipulates for the rights of coastal States provides that:

                     1. The coastal State may take the necessary steps in its
                         territorial sea to prevent passage which is not
                         innocent.

                     2. In the case of ships proceeding to internal waters or
                         a call at a port facility outside internal waters, the
                         coastal State also has the right to take the necessary
                         steps to prevent any breach of the conditions to
                         which admission of those ships to internal waters or
                         such a call is subject.
                                                                                                                             41

                     3. The coastal State may, without discrimination in
                         form or in fact among foreign ships, suspend
                         temporarily in specified areas of its territorial sea
                         the innocent passage of foreign ships if such
                         suspension is essential for the protection of its
                         security, including weapons exercises. Such
                         suspension shall take effect only after having been
                         duly published.

The Convention however provides that the sovereignty over the territorial sea must not be
exercised arbitrarily by the coastal States but must be in conformity with the clear
provisions of the Convention. It therefore states in Article 2 (3) that "the sovereignty over
the territorial sea is exercised subject to this Convention and to other rules of international
law".

For contiguous zone, the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, grants
the coastal States rights to establish their contiguous zone which is adjacent to the territorial
sea. The Convention in its Article 33 states that the contiguous zone may extend up to but
not beyond 24 nautical miles from baseline from which the territorial sea is measured. The
establishment of contiguous zone is aimed at preventing violation of laws and regulations
within the coastal State's territorial sea.

The Convention provides that in contiguous zone, the coastal State may exercise control
necessary to:

            a. Prevent infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration, or
                sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or territorial
                sea;

             b. Punish infringement of the above laws and regulations
                committed within its territory or territorial sea.

A coastal State can exercise its rights in a contiguous zone to defend its interests by
stopping foreign ship suspected of offending against its laws and regulations, in order to
search, inspect or punish the offenders. All these rights should however be exercised with
caution as they do not in any case change the legal status of the zone as part of the high
seas.

4.5 Bays

Bays constitute one of the more complex maritime features. A bay is defined as a large
indentation in a shoreline. This can become an issue with straight baselines as States may
                                                                                                                             42

try to characterise large bays as internal waters to project maritime boundaries and thereby
control over-flight access. To prevent this, the Convention defines a bay as "a well-marked
indentation whose penetration is in such proportion to the width of its mouth as to contain
land-locked waters and constitute more than a mere curvature of the coast. An indentation
shall not, however, be regarded as a bay unless its area is as large as, or larger than, that of
the semi-circle whose diameter is a line drawn across the mouth of that indentation"
(UNCLOS Art. 10). The level of control a State has over a bay is determined by the distance
between the low-water line on either side of the bay's entrance. If the entrance is equal to
or less than 24 miles wide at low-tide then a State can draw a straight baseline across the
entrance, effectively making the entire bay internal waters. If the entrance is more than 24
miles wide, a State can only draw a straight baseline 24 miles across the bay in a way that
maximizes the area of internal waters. However, the so-called "historic" bays, such as the
Chesapeake Bay, are not subject to this provision.

4.6 International Straits and Waterways

We defined international straits under unit 3 to mean, `straits which are within the territorial
sovereignty of a certain state, but which are used for international navigation and so are
subject to special rules of international law aimed at securing the rights of passage for
vessels registered in foreign states'. The above definition indicates that the straits are within
the territorial sovereignty of coastal states. By this, it is logical to argue that since the
coastal states enjoy full sovereignty within their internal waters and the straits are within
this zone they would exercise control in the straits. In general, therefore, there seems to be
no right of navigation for foreign vessels through internal waters even under customary
international law notwithstanding the often-quoted dictum that "...the ports of every state
must be open to foreign vessels and can only be closed when the vital interest of the state
so requires" (R. R. Churchhill and A. V. Lowe, 1999). However, the coastal states are
expected not to unnecessarily and unreasonably forbid navigation in its internal waters.
Where there is unnecessary closure, or conditions of access to ports are grossly
unreasonable or discriminatory, it might be held to amount to an abus de droit, and the
coastal state might be internationally responsible even where there was no right of entry to
the port (Churchill and Lowe, 1999).

4.7 The High Seas

This is an area beyond the limit of national jurisdictions and therefore excluded from States
claims and sovereignty. Under Article1, 1958 Convention, the high seas began where
territorial sea ends, however, in the equivalent Article 86 of 1982 Convention the concept
of the high seas is a more limited one in that it applies only beyond the limit of the exclusive
                                                                                                                             43

economic zone. The high seas are open to all States, whether coastal or landlocked States
and are reserved for peaceful purpose. No States can therefore lay claim to any portion of
the high seas.

Study reveals that the legal concept of the high seas began to be developed in the 17th
century. In fact, during in 1608 the Dutch jurist, philosopher, poet and playwrite Hugo
Grotius published his book Mare Liberum, meaning; `Freedom of the Seas'. The book
justified the Netherland's trading activities in the Indian Ocean and formulated the
principle that beyond a limited area under national jurisdiction, the use of the seas was free
for all nations (F. O. Agama PhD Dissertation, 2016).
By the first half of the 19th century, the recognition of the high seas as an area exempt from
claims to State sovereignty had, with some exceptions, become generally accepted. The
implication of that principle is that no State had the right to prevent ships belonging to
other States from using the high seas for any lawful purpose. What constitutes lawful
purpose is nowadays essentially determined by the United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, (UNCLOS).It follows that, as with outer space and celestial bodies, the high
seas are considered re communis omnium, or `things common to all', and are not subject to
the sovereignty of any State, apart from general acquiesce that States are bound to refrain
from any acts which might adversely affect the use of the high seas by other States or their
nationals, including navigational rights (Art. 90 UNCLOS). This constitutes the rights and
duties of states in the high seas.

It follows therefore that the high seas are purely free from national jurisdiction and no
nation can acquire or appropriate any part of the high seas as forming part of its territory.
This general rule however is subject to the operation of the doctrines of recognition,
acquiescence and prescription, where, by long usage accepted by other nations, certain
areas of the high seas bounding on the territorial waters of coastal States may be rendered
subject to that State's sovereignty (M N Shaw, 2004). This was emphasized by the Court
in the Anglo-Norwegian Fisheries Case (1951 ICJ Reports, p.116). Every State whether
coastal or land-locked has free access to the high seas in accordance with the provision of
Article 87 of the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. They have the freedom of
navigation, over flight, freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines; freedom to
construct artificial islands and other installations permitted under international law, and
lastly, freedom of fishing and scientific research. These freedoms are to be exercised by
States with due regard to the interests of other States in their exercise of the freedom of the
high seas (UNCLOS, Art. 87(1) & (2)). Also, in addition to those freedoms mentioned in
Article 87 of the 1982 Convention is the freedom to use the high sea for weapon testing
and naval exercises.
                                                                                                                             44

One may ask, since the high seas are declared to be beyond national jurisdiction, how is
jurisdiction exercised there, who exercises jurisdiction and upon whom. Because the use
or exercise of freedom to use the high seas is strictly with due regard to the rights of other
users of the seas who are equally entitled to enjoy the same freedom, the issue of
jurisdiction cannot be completely ruled out in the high seas. It should be emphasised that
the foundation of the maintenance of order on the high seas has rested upon the concept of
the nationality of the ship and the consequent jurisdiction of the flag State over the ship. It
is, basically, the flag State that enforces the rules and regulations both of its own municipal
law and that of international law on the high seas. Article 82 paragraph 2 of the Convention
provides that these freedoms shall be exercised by all States with due regard for the
interests of other States in their exercise of the freedom of the high seas, and also with due
regard for the rights under this Convention with respect to activities in the Area.

4.7.1 Continental Shelf

The continental shelf can be defined as a geological expression referring to the ledges that
project from the continental landmass into seas and which are covered with only a
relatively shallow layer of water (some 150- 200 meters) and which eventually fall away
into the ocean depths some thousands of meters deep (M N Shaw, 2004) p. 521. The ledges
or shelves take up some 7 to 8 percent of total area of ocean and their extent varies
considerably from place to place. The 1982 Convention describes continental shelf as:

                 1. The continental shelf of a coastal State comprises the
                     seabed and subsoil of the submarine areas that extend
                     beyond its territorial sea throughout the natural
                     prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the
                     continental margin, or to a distance of 200 nautical miles
                     from the baselines from which the breadth of the
                     territorial sea is measured where the outer edge of the
                     continental margin does not extend up to that distance.

                 2. The continental shelf of a coastal State shall not extend
                     beyond the limits provided for in paragraphs 4 to 6.

                 3. The continental margin comprises the submerged
                     prolongation of the land mass of the coastal State, and
                     consists of the seabed and subsoil of the shelf, the slope
                     and the rise. It does not include the deep ocean floor with
                     its oceanic ridges or the subsoil thereof.
                                                                                                                             45

With regard to coastal state's power, the court reiterated in the North Sea Continental Shelf
Case Federal Republic of Germany v Denmark, Federal Republic of Germany v
Netherlands (1969) ICJ Reports, pp.3, 22; 41 ILR, pp.29,51 that:

                     The rights of the coastal State in respect of the area of
                     continental shelf that constitutes a natural prolongation
                     of its land territory into and under the sea exist ipso
                     facto and ab initio,by virtue of its sovereignty over the
                     land and as an extension of it in an exercise of sovereign
                     rights for the purpose of exploring the seabed and
                     exploiting its natural resources. In short there is here an
                     inherent right.

The United Nations Convention on the law of the Sea, 1982 grants the coastal State
sovereign rights over the continental shelf for the purposes of exploring and exploiting its
natural resources. Such rights are exclusive in that no other State may undertake such
activities without prior and express authorization from the coastal State (UNCLOS, Art.
77).

4.7.2 Exclusive Economic Zone

Article 55 of the Convention defines Exclusive Economic Zone as `an area beyond and
adjacent to the territorial sea, subject to the specific legal regime established in this Part,
under which the rights and jurisdiction of the coastal State and the rights and freedoms of
other States are governed by the relevant provisions of this Convention'. This definition
reveals that in the Exclusive Economic Zone, there are shared rights and jurisdictions
between coastal States and their neighbouring States especially the geographically
disadvantaged States. It follows that coastal States, unlike what obtains in the territorial
seas, lack absolute sovereignty over their exclusive economic zone. A coastal State can
only exercise jurisdiction with respect to exploitation of the natural resources within its
exclusive economic zone and as it regards other activities such as marine research and
conservation of the living resources of the zone. Unlike the case with territorial sea, other
States have freedom of navigation and over-flight within the exclusive economic zone.

4.7.3 The Seabed and Subsoil

This zone is known as the `Area'. It is the deep seabed adjacent to the continental shelf
which lies beneath the high sea. The seabed is beyond national jurisdiction and its resources
are declared the common heritage of mankind (Art. 136, UNCLOS). The implication is
that no State or juridical person shall exercise the sovereignty or sovereign rights over any
part of the Area or its resources (Art. 137, UNCLOS). The Area is therefore open to use
                                                                                                                             46

exclusively for peaceful purposes by all States, whether coastal or land-locked, without
discrimination and without prejudice to the relevant provisions of the Convention under
the supervision and control of the International Seabed Authority (ISA) established under
section 4 of this Convention.

4.8 Summary

From our discussion in this unit, we understand that marine space is divided into various
zones. In some of these zones, coastal States can exercise full and exclusive sovereignty in
relation to others States rights. In other zones, the sovereign rights of these States are
limited in some ways whereas in yet other zones such as the high seas and seabed, States
have no jurisdiction whatsoever save as it relates to the ships that fly their flags and other
rights recognized under the Convention. In this unit, we have discussed: The juridical
nature of the various zones of the sea and states' rights and responsibilities in these sea
zones.

4.9 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

1. M Ravin, Law of the Sea, Maritime Boundaries and Dispute Settlement Mechanisms
(Germany: Nippon Foundation, 2005) p.5.

2. M. N. Shaw International Law (5thedn Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
        2004) p. 543.

3. Federal Republic of Germany v Denmark, Federal Republic of Germany v
        Netherlands (1969) ICJ Reports, pp.3, 22; 41 ILR, pp.29,51

4. R. R. Churchill and A. V. Lowe, The Law of the Sea, 3rd ed. (Manchester: Juris
        Publishing, 1999) 61.

5. L Henkin et al, International Law Cases and Materials (2nd edn, St. Paul Minn.:
        West Publishing Co., 1987) P.1244.

4.10 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1. In the territorial sea coastal States possess full sovereignty and exercises jurisdiction
which jurisdiction extends to the air space above the territorial sea, its bed and subsoil. The
jurisdiction of coastal state in territorial sea is qualified/limited only by the right of innocent
passage. However, in the contiguous zone coastal State can only exercise control in order
to prevent infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration, or sanitary laws and regulations
within its territory or territorial sea which does not change the status of the zone as part of
the high sea with navigation freedom for other States.
                                                                                                                             47

2. Innocent passage is a concept within the law of the sea which allows for a vessel to
pass through the territorial waters of another State, subject to certain restrictions. To be
innocent, the passage or transit must not be prejudicial to the good order or security of the
coastal State. This concept is captured in article 19 of the UNCLOS.

3. The high sea is beyond the limit of national jurisdictions and therefore excluded
from States claims and sovereignty. However, flag States must assert jurisdiction over the
ships that fly their flag. Therefore, it is the flag State that enforces the rules and regulations
both of its own municipal law and that of international law on the high seas.
                                                                                                                             48

MODULE 2: PRINCIPLES OF THE FREEDOM OF THE SEA

Introduction

In this module, we will concentrate on the doctrine of the freedom of the high seas. In fact,
the sea is an international arena and just like the outer space, it has been proclaimed to be
incapable of national appropriation. It is therefore treated as a common heritage of
mankind. This does not mean that States activities in the high sea are without any
regulations.

Unit 1: Jurisdiction over the Sea/Ocean

Contents
1.1 Introduction
1.2 Learning Outcomes
1.3 Limit of the High Sea
1.4 Jurisdiction over the High Sea
1.4.1 Jurisdiction over Vessels on High Sea
1.5 Jurisdiction over Acts Committed on National Vessels
1.6 Summary
1.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
1.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment exercise

1.1 Introduction

The seas were at the earlier period of human relations thought of subjugation to national
sovereignties; that was why some nations, the Portuguese in particular, during the
seventeenth century claimed huge tracts of the high seas as part of their territorial domain.
The proclamation of large portions of the high seas as being part of their national territory
by the Portuguese provoked a response by Grotius who elaborated the doctrine of the open
seas, whereby, according to him, the ocean as res communis were to be open and accessible
to all nations but cannot be appropriated by any State. The freedom of the seas became
widely accepted as a cardinal principle of international law although not all the seas were
so characterized as it was permissible for a coastal State to appropriate a maritime belt
around its coastline as territorial water and treat same as an indivisible part of its territory.
Beyond the territorial sea, coastal States may under the present legal regime of the sea
exercise certain jurisdictional functions in the Contiguous zones, Continental Shelf and
even in the Exclusive Economic Zone as we have seen in the preceding module. The
predominance of the concept of the freedom of the high seas has been modified by the
                                                                                                                             49

realization of resources present in the seas and seabed beyond the territorial seas. Thus, the
concept and limit of the high seas has been seriously reduced under the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 unlike what obtained the Geneva Conventions on
the Law of the Sea, 1958.

1.2 Learning Outcomes

At the completion of this unit it is expected that you will be able to:

    i. Explain the limit of the high sea
    ii. Appreciate the juridical nature of the high sea

1.3 Limit of the High Sea
The high seas are the large body of waters which are beyond national jurisdiction. This is
usually referred to as international waters. Thus, no states can appropriate or proclaim any
portions of the high seas as part of their territorial domain. This is what the principle of
freedom of the sea contemplates. The high seas are beyond States' jurisdiction, known
under the doctrine of 'Mare liberum'. Every State therefore has the right to fishing,
navigation, overflight, laying submarine cables and pipelines, as well as scientific research
in the high seas. The waters outside the national jurisdiction are referred to as the high seas
which in Latin are called mare liberum (meaning free sea).

High Seas, under the law of the sea consist of all parts of the mass of saltwater surrounding
the globe that are not part of the territorial sea or internal waters of a state. For several
centuries beginning in the European Middle Ages, a number of coastal states have sought
to exercise jurisdiction s over large portions of the high seas. This led to the promulgation
by Grotius on the doctrine of the freedom of the high seas. Freedom of the seas was
ideologically connected with other 19th-century freedoms, particularly laissez-faire
economic theory, and was vigorously pressed by the great maritime and commercial
powers, especially Great Britain. Freedom of the high seas is now recognized to include
freedom of navigation, fishing, the laying of submarine cables and pipelines, and overflight
of aircraft.

The high sea is massive occupying almost 50 per cent of the earth surface and one third of
the entire sea surface. Under the 1958 Conventions on the Law of the Sea particularly the
Convention on the High Seas of 29th April, 1958, the high seas began immediately from
where territorial sea ends (Art. 1 UNCLOS I). The first United Nations Conference on the
Law of the Sea, convened at Geneva in 1958, sought to codify the law of the high seas but
                                                                                                                             50

was unable to resolve some important issues, notably the maximum permissible breadth of
the territorial sea subject to national sovereignty. However, the increased demands by some
coastal states for increased security on waters adjacent to their territorial sea, for exclusive
offshore-fishing rights, for conservation of maritime resources, and for exploitation of
resources, especially oil, found in continental shelves necessitated other conventions to
consider the limit of the high seas. But unfortunately a second conference (Geneva, 1960)
also did not resolve the issue hence the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea,
1982 effective from 1994. Under this Convention, concept of the high seas is a more limited
one in that it applies only beyond the limit of the exclusive economic zone (Art. 86
UNCLOS III):

          The provisions of this Part apply to all parts of the sea that are not
          included in the exclusive economic zone, in the territorial sea or in
          the internal waters of a State, or in the archipelagic waters of an
          archipelagic State. This article does not entail any abridgement of
          the freedoms enjoyed by all States in the exclusive economic zone
          in accordance with article 58.

Self-Assessment Exercise

            1. Briefly narrate the limit of the high seas
            2. Who has jurisdiction over vessels on the high sea?
            3. Discuss briefly the three forms of jurisdiction you know

1.4 Jurisdiction on the High Seas

The principle of the freedom of the high seas is vividly captured under Article 87 Paragraph
1 (a) ­ (f) of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea when it provides thus:

       The high seas are open to all States, whether coastal or land-locked. Freedom
       of the high seas is exercised under the conditions laid down by this
       Convention and by other rules of international law. It comprises, inter alia,
       both for coastal and land-locked States:
       (a) freedom of navigation;
       (b) freedom of overflight;
       (c) freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines, subject to Part VI;
                                                                                                                             51

       (d) freedom to construct artificial islands and other installations permitted
       under international law, subject to Part VI;
       (e) freedom of fishing, subject to the conditions laid down in the section ;
       (f) freedom of scientific research, subject to Parts VI and XIII.

Since the high seas are declared to be beyond national jurisdiction and free for use by all
States, the important question then is, how is jurisdiction exercised on the high sea, who
may exercise jurisdiction and upon whom? The truth is that in the use or exercise of
freedom to use the high seas States must strictly pay due regard to the rights of other users
of the seas who are equally entitled to enjoy the same freedom. As a result, the issue of
jurisdiction cannot be completely ruled out in the high seas. In the main, the foundation of
the maintenance of peace and order on the high seas lies squarely upon the concept of the
nationality of the ship and the consequent jurisdiction of the flag State over the ship. It is,
fundamentally, the flag State that enforces the rules and regulations both of its own
municipal law and that of international law. Therefore, a ship without a flag will be
deprived of many of the benefits and rights available under the legal regime of the high
seas (M. N Shaw, 2004). Article 87 (2) of the Convention stipulates to this effect that `these
freedoms shall be exercised by all States with due regard for the interests of other States in
their exercise of the freedom of the high seas, and also with due regard for the rights under
this Convention with respect to activities in the Area'.

1.4.1 Jurisdiction over Vessels on the High Seas

Under international law, the general proposition is that the right to requisition ships (that
is the right to make an official order or request by a State demanding for surrender, and
assuming control of a ship in the sea, usually when members on board are suspected to
have committed a crime) rests with the State of registry. Requisition is usually done with
the aim of checking criminal activities in the sea. In the high seas, vessels are generally
subject to the exclusive jurisdiction and control of the State whose flag they fly. This rule
of customary international law is codified in Article 92(1) United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea. The article state that Ships shall sail under the flag of one State only
and, save in exceptional cases expressly provided for in international treaties or in this
Convention, shall be subject to its exclusive jurisdiction on the high seas.

This proposition was a formulation following the British-Dutch exchange on whose right
it was to requisition a vessel owned by Dutch corporation. In 1917, the British Government
informed the Netherland that it intended to requisition a number of vessels which, although
owned by Dutch corporation and registered in the Netherlands, were `in reality British'
because of the fact that British nationals owned the shares of the controlling corporations.
                                                                                                                             52

The Netherland Government vehemently opposed the move, asserting that it alone had the
right to requisition vessels flying the Dutch flag. In reply, the British Government changed
its position, noting that it did not seek to rely upon the fact of British ownership or control
but upon the recognized right of a belligerent to requisition neutral ships present in its
territory. It was admitted that a State of `ultimate ownership' is entitled to requisition
foreign-flag vessels with the consent or acquiescence of the country of registry (L. Henkin).
If the State of registry should resist the transfer of its vessels to the control of another State,
the latter could still requisition these or other vessels, whether or not owned by its nationals,
which it finds within its territory. A suggestion has also been made that requisition by a
State of national-owned vessels found on the high seas or in foreign ports might be justified,
even without the consent of the flag State, on the ground that the latter is unable to afford
the vessels adequate protection against the dangers of hostilities.

In customary international law, a State must have the legal capacity to act, and a legitimate
interest in exercising jurisdiction. They are three distinct bundles of rights that compose
the concept of state jurisdiction according to the American Law Institute, Restatement
(Third) Foreign Relations Law of the United States (1987) at § 401(a) ­ (c). These include:

    i. Prescriptive jurisdiction

Meaning to prescribe, that is capacity of a State to make its law applicable to the activities,
relations, or status of persons, or the interests of persons in things, whether by legislation,
by executive act, or order, by administrative rule or recognition, or by determination by a
court.

    ii. Adjudicative jurisdiction

Meaning to adjudicate, that is the capacity of a State to subject persons or things to the
process of its courts or administrative tribunals, whether in civil or in criminal proceedings,
whether or not the state is a party to the proceedings.

    iii. Enforcement jurisdiction

This means the capacity of a State to enforce or compel compliance or to punish non-
compliance with its laws or regulations, whether through the courts or by use of executive,
administrative, police, or other non-judicial action.

Each of state jurisdictions is distinct; they differ in scope and are subject to different tests,
through different internationally accepted basis for establishing `sufficient connections'
(Honniball, 2016). Legitimate prescriptive jurisdiction may exist for a state with regard to
                                                                                                                             53

a particular form of conduct, but not for concurrent adjudicative (C Ryngaert, 2015) or
enforcement jurisdiction. The valid basis for one form of jurisdiction cannot, in and of
itself, justify the existence of another form. The implication is that each doctrine is
completely independent, but the issue is that each form must be established by its own
international legal criteria. For example, a port state's enforcement jurisdiction for a
particular law would also depend on its jurisdictional right to first prescribe the said law.
Thus in practice, any limitations on prescription will also operate to limit enforcement. See
generally (Honniball, 2016).

Furthermore, States can allow other States to stop, board, search or arrest its vessels
through international agreements or on an ad hoc basis. States have, for example, entered
into international treaty arrangements to facilitate the interception of drug trafficking,
terrorism, illegal fishing and other unlawful acts on the high seas. In addition, measures
against foreign ships on the high seas have also been justified on the grounds of self-
defence or necessity.

It is the requirement of the law that ships should sail under the flags of one State only and
are subject to its exclusive jurisdiction, save in exceptional circumstances (M N Shaw,
2004). Where a ship sails under the flags of more than one State, it may be treated as a ship
without nationality and will not be able to claim any of the nationalities concerned (The
Geneva Convention, Art.6 and UNCLOS, Art.92). Where a ship sailing the high seas is
stateless, and does not fly a flag, it may be boarded and seized. This was the decision of
the Privy Council in the case of Naim Molvan v Attorney- General for Palestine ((1948)
AC 351, 13AD 51; US v Monroy (1980) 614 F.2d 61.). This basic doctrine of customary
international law that `vessels on the high seas are subject to no authority except that of the
State whose flag they fly' is enunciated and elaborated in the Lotus Case ((1927) PCIJ,
Series A, N0.IO 25.; Sellers v Maritime Safety Inspector (1999) 2NZLR 44, 46- 48.) by the
Permanent Court of International Justice (PCIJ), when it explained questions relating to
jurisdiction on the high seas. The exclusivity of the flag State jurisdiction is without
exception regarding warships and ships owned or operated by a State where they are used
solely on governmental non-commercial service. In which case such ships, according to
Articles 95 and 96 of the 1982 Convention, have, `complete immunity from the jurisdiction
of any State other than the flag State'.

1.5 Jurisdiction over Acts Committed on National Vessels

Rights and duties are those of the flag State to exercise jurisdiction over acts committed on
vessels which fly its flag. In the Rights and Duties of the Flag State Restatement (Revised).
502:
                                                                                     54

1.  The flag State is obliged

    a. to exercise effective authority and control over the ship in administrative,

    technical and labour matters; and

    b. i. to take such measures as are necessary to ensure safety at sea, prevent

    collisions, and prevent, reduce and control pollutions of the marine

    environment, and

    ii. to adopt laws and regulations and take such other steps as are required to

    achieve the conformity of these measures with generally accepted

    international standards, regulations, procedures and practices, and to secure

    their implementation and observance

2.  The flag State may exercise jurisdiction to prescribe, to adjudicate, and to

    enforce by non-judicial means with respect to the ship or any conduct that

    takes place on the ship.

Article 97 of the Convention provides as follow on this issue:

            In the event of a collision or any other incident of navigation
            concerning a ship on the high seas, involving the penal or
            disciplinary responsibility of the master or of any other person in the
            service of the ship, no penal or disciplinary proceedings may be
            initiated against such person except before the judicial or
            administrative authorities either of the flag State or of the State of
            which such person is a national

See inter alia the Lotus Case (France v. Turkey (1926-7) PCIJ Series A N0. 10

In conclusion, the high seas are a purely free zone so that every State whether coastal or
land-locked has unfettered access to the high sea. Although the high sea is free for use by
all States, the Convention still provides that such rights of usage must be exercise with due
respect of other States' rights to use the high sea also. Jurisdiction on the high sea mainly
relate to that which the States exercise on the vessels which fly their flags on the high sea
and those exercised as exception to the general rule of the freedom of the high sea as
discussed under this unit.

1.6 Summary
In this unit we discussed the concept of The High Seas wherein we observe that the high
sea is the body of waters which is beyond national jurisdiction. The high seas also referred
to as international waters constitute a global common and no portions thereof can be
                                                                                                                             55

appropriated by any States. The flag-state has exclusive jurisdiction over its vessels
operating on the High Seas except in certain circumstances as where other States can assert
jurisdiction in accordance with the rules of international law.

1.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

1. Arron N. Honniball, The Exclusive Jurisdiction of Flag States: A Limitation on
Pro-active Port States? (2016) The International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law,
Vol. 31

2. C Ryngaert, Jurisdiction in International Law. (2nd ed., Oxford University Press,
       Oxford, 2015) at p. 10

3. K Hixson, `Extraterritorial Jurisdiction Under the Third Restatement of Foreign
       Relations Law of the United States' (1988) 12 Fordham International Law Journal
       127­152, at p. 130, referring to the `Second Restatement, § 7

4. D König, `Flag of Ships', (2009) Max Planck Encyclopaedia of Public
       International Law, at para. 25.

1.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. High Seas, under the law of the sea consist of all parts of the mass of saltwater
        surrounding the globe that are not part of the territorial sea or internal waters of a
        state. This is more akin to the 1958 Convention on the High Seas under which the
        high sea begins immediately where the territorial sea ends. See article 1 of the
        Convention. However, under this UNCLOS III, the concept of the high seas is a
        more limited one in that it applies only beyond the limit of the exclusive economic
        zone. See article 86 of the UNCLOS III.

   2. Under the rule of customary international law, vessels in the high sea are generally
        subject to the exclusive jurisdiction and control of the State whose flag they fly.
        This customary international law rule is codified in Article 92(1) UNCLOS
                                                                                                                        56

3. Three forms of Jurisdiction include:

i. Prescriptive Jurisdiction: This refers to the capacity of a State to prescribe or
        make its law applicable to the activities, relations, or status of persons, or the
        interests of persons in things, whether by legislation, by executive act, or order,
        by administrative rule or recognition, or by determination by a court.

ii. Adjudicative Jurisdiction: This refers to the capacity or right of a State to subject
        persons or things to the process of its courts or administrative tribunals, whether
        in civil or in criminal proceedings, whether or not the State is a party to the
        proceedings.

iii. Enforcement Jurisdiction: This is the right or capacity of a State to enforce or
        compel compliance or to punish non-compliance with its laws or regulations,
        whether through the courts or by use of executive, administrative, police, or
        other non-judicial action.
                                                                                                                             57

Unit 2: Traditional Freedoms of Access to the Sea by all State

Contents

2.1 Introduction
2.2 Learning Outcomes
2.3 Freedom of Access to the Sea by all States
2.4 Ordinary Rights of jurisdiction in time of Peace
2.5 Extraordinary rights of jurisdiction in time of peace
2.6 Summary
2.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

2.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment exercise

2.1 Introduction

Freedom of the seas (Latin: mare liberum, meaning (free sea) as we have already known
here is a principle in the international law and sea which stresses freedom of the States to
navigate the Seas. The principle also disapproves of war fought in waters. The freedom is
to be breached only in a necessary international agreement. The former President of
America Thomas Woodrow Wilson had this principle as one of his Fourteen Points
proposed during the First World War. In his speech to the Congress, he stated in the
following terms:

              Absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas, outside
              territorial waters, alike in peace and in war, except as the seas
              may be closed in whole or in part by international action for the
              enforcement of international covenants.

Today, the concept of freedom of the seas is contained in the United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea particularly Article 87(1) which provides that `the high seas are open
to all states, whether coastal or land-locked'. Article 87(1) (a) to (f) enumerate the freedoms
to include navigation, overflight, the laying of submarine cables, building artificial islands,
fishing and scientific research.

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit, you are expected to be able to:
                                                                                                                             58

    i. Give an overview of the principle of the freedom of the seas
    ii. Explain what is the rights of jurisdiction in time of peace, and
   iii. The extraordinary rights of jurisdiction in time of peace

2.3 Freedoms of Access to the Sea by all States
This is a doctrine which stipulates that the high seas in time of peace are open to all nations
and cannot be subjected to national sovereignty. This doctrine essentially limits national
rights and jurisdiction over the Seas to a narrow belt of sea surrounding its coastline.
Freedom of the Seas in time of peace has gained general and wide acceptance that we
hardly recall that it was not so in the beginning. It was once asserted that the ships of one
nation might lawfully search the vessels of another nation even in time of peace. For
instance, Algeria, Tripoli, Tunis, and Morocco once supported themselves by the `tribute
levied on commerce as an alternative to piratical depredations' (A G Hays, 1918).
However, the America's first military excursion to Europe put an end to this practice which
was inimical to the notion of the freedom of the High seas. However, the fact that the
freedom of the sea is no longer questioned by any State today does not mean that the
doctrine is not without some qualification.

Self-Assessment Exercise

              1. Differentiate between ordinary and extraordinary jurisdiction in time of
                  peace in relation to the use of high seas.

              2. What does the doctrine of freedom of access state?

2.4 Ordinary Rights of jurisdiction in time of Peace
The high seas are not subject to any State's jurisdiction under the doctrine of 'Mare
liberum'. All States therefore have the right to sail the high seas as well as many other rights
including fishing, navigation, overflight, laying submarine cables and pipelines, and
scientific research (UNCLOS, Art. 90). Ordinarily in peaceful atmosphere, ships sailing
the high seas are generally under the jurisdiction of the flag State where there is one in
accordance with Article 92 (1) of the Convention. However, when a ship is involved in
certain criminal acts, such as piracy any State can exercise jurisdiction under the doctrine
                                                                                                                             59

of universal jurisdiction (UNCLOS Art. 105). Universal jurisdiction allows states or
international organizations to claim criminal jurisdiction over an accused person regardless
of where the alleged crime occurred based on the notion that such crimes harm the
international community and disturbs international order itself. The United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea equally contains, under part XII, special provisions for
the protection of the marine environment, which, in certain cases, grants port States the
rights to exercise extraterritorial jurisdiction over foreign ships on the high seas. Such
rights of extraordinary jurisdiction can only be exercised where and when foreign ships
have violated international environmental rules (adopted by the International Maritime
Organisation), such as the MARPOL Convention (J J Fanø, 2019).

2.5 Extraordinary Rights of jurisdiction in time of Peace

This is a situation whereby a State assumes jurisdiction on the ground of the fact that the
act or behavior of another State is producing effect within its territory (D J Harris, 2004)
p. 612. In this case, some States have sought to apply their law outside their territory (A V
Lowe, 1983). In certain circumstances, a State cannot wait for arrival of a perceived danger
to its security within its territorial jurisdiction before it acts. In such circumstance, it must
take preventive measure to forestall the danger from materializing while still outside its
territorial jurisdiction. Under this circumstance, a state may claim a measure of
extraordinary protective jurisdiction beyond the limit of its territory. Thus, a country whose
peace is threatened by persons on board vessels sailing under the flag of another State may
in an emergence, exercise extraordinary jurisdiction by way of search and capture such
vessels and arrest the persons on board, despite the general rule that there is no right of
visiting and seizing vessels of a friendly power in time of peace on the High Seas. Whether
the danger was sufficient to justify the seizure of the vessel at the moment it was effected
may be a different question altogether.

2.6 Summary

The concept of the freedom of the Seas is one the most important principles of the law of
the sea. This is because it grants all States including those that are land-locked the free
access to the high seas. This freedom is however qualified by the relevant provisions of the
Convention in that it must be exercised with great regard to other States' rights and freedom
as stipulated under Article 87 (2) of the Convention. In this unit we discussed: Freedom of
the sea, Ordinary rights of jurisdiction in time of peace and Extraordinary rights of
jurisdiction in time of peace
                                                                                                                             60

2.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

1. Knock, Thomas J., To End All Wars. Woodrow Wilson and the Quest for a New World
      Order, (Princeton: 1992), pp. 34-36, 113-115

2. A V Lowe (ed), Extraordinary Jurisdiction (London: 1983).
3. Jesper Jarl Fanø (2019), Enforcing International Maritime Legislation on Air

      Pollution through UNCLOS. Hart Publishing.
4. Arthur Garfield Hays, `What is meant by the freedom of the Sea, (1918) The American

      Journey of International Law, Vol. N0.12. pp. 283-290.

2.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

A)
                i. Ordinarily in peaceful atmosphere, ships sailing the high seas are
                         generally under the jurisdiction of the flag State where there is one in
                         accordance with Article 92 (1) of the UNCLOS. However, when a
                         ship is involved in certain criminal acts, such as piracy or slave trade,
                         any State can exercise jurisdiction under the doctrine of universal
                         jurisdiction in line with article 105 of the UNCLOS.

                ii. Extraordinary right of jurisdiction in peaceful time depicts a situation
                         whereby a State assumes jurisdiction on the ground of the fact that the
                         act or behavior of another State is producing effect within its territory.
                         it can apply its law outside its territorial zone to avert any perceived
                         threat to its security.

B) The doctrine of freedom of access to the sea stipulates that the high seas in time of
peace are open to all nations and incapable of appropriation by any nation.
                                                                                                                             61

Unit 3: The Need for or Importance of the Freedom of the Sea

Contents

3.1 Introduction
3.2 Learning Outcomes
3.3 Importance of the freedom of the sea
3.4 Freedom of the High Seas and Conservation of Living Resources of the Sea
3.5 Summary
3.6 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
3.7 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

3.1 Introduction
Freedom of the seas was the early 20th century concept which projects that the world's seas
serve as a global common for the purpose of carrying cargo and facilitating commerce. As
both a communal property and throughway, the seas thus could not be controlled by any
sovereign State outside of territorial waters, according to freedom of the seas (J L Young,
2014).

3.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit you are expected to be able to:

    i. Appreciate the general need for freedom of the seas
    ii. Understand the relation between freedom of the sea and conservation of living

            resources

Self-Assessment Exercise

     1. In what ways is the doctrine of the freedom of the sea important to
          mankind?

     2. How does the doctrine of the freedom of the seas relate with the concept
          of conservation of sea resources?

3.3 Importance of the freedom of the sea
The history of the law of the sea has been dominated by one relevant and persistent theme
involving the competition between the exercise of national jurisdiction over portions of the
                                                                                                                             62

sea and the idea of the freedom of the seas. Such divergent and conflicting claims waxed
and waned through the centuries especially with the creation of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the sea, 1982. All these only reflect the political, strategic, and
economic importance of this concept of the freedom of the seas (D.P. O'Connell and I.A.
Shearer, 1985).

i. Economic Importance
The doctrine of the freedom of the high seas has a purpose and this purpose actually
underpins its essence and importance. It should be reiterated that while this principle grants
all States free and unhindered access to the high seas, there are rules and regulations to
guide the activities of States in this zone for maximum cooperation and productivity. The
principle of the high seas which makes this area open for use to all States, with every State
including those that are land-locked possessing the freedoms of navigation and overflight
and the freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines, to conduct scientific research, and
to fish has enormous economic and political fortune for the entire world. Even the land-
locked States which naturally are without coastline are granted free access to the high seas
by reason of this principle (UNCLOS Art 87). The economic implication of this freedom
is that greater number of States will partake in the exploration of the sea and exploitation
of the sea resources within this zone. This, in turn will add to the economic growth of the
individual nations and by implication the international economy.

ii. Political Importance

Politically, the principle of the freedom of the seas forbids any nation from the claim of
any portions of the high seas. No nations shall exercise jurisdiction on other users of the
seas except as allowed by the law. This is the basis for cooperation among sovereign States
on the high seas ensuring the peaceful uses of the high seas as contemplated by the Charter
of the United Nations. Which principle, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea builds upon when it provides that, `No State may validly purport to subject any part of
the high seas to its sovereignty' (UNCLOS Art. 89). The principle of the freedom of the
high seas is therefore crucial for peaceful uses of the high seas and for prosperous economic
activities in this international zone.

3.4 Freedom of the High Seas and Conservation of Living Resources of the Sea
The Convention has provided to the effect that the freedoms to use the high seas `shall be
exercised by all States with due regard for the interests of other States in their exercise of
the freedom of the high seas, and also with due regard for the rights under this Convention
with respect to activities in the Area' (UNCLOS Art. 87). The rights to freely use the high
seas by all States are qualified by the need to respect the equal rights and freedoms of other
                                                                                                                             63

states on the high seas. Apart from this the question of how the freedom to use the seas
might impact the living resources of the seas negatively if not appropriately regulated need
to be given attention. The Convention also envisaged the possibility of such unfettered
freedom endangering the continued existence of some marine resources when it made
provisions to that end.

Generally, Articles 116 to 120 of UNCLOS provide for the conservation and management
of the living resources of the high seas. The Convention provides to the effect that all States
have the right to engage in fishing on the high seas subject to their treaty obligations
(Article 116). Article 117 of the Convention particularly requires States to adopt measures
for the conservation of the living resources of the high seas while Article 118 gives them
the obligation to cooperate with other States in conservation and management of living
resources in the areas of the high seas. In all these cases it is generally the responsibility of
States whose nationals are engaged in fishing on the high seas to negotiate with other States
fishing in the same area or fishing the same stocks to enter into negotiations with a view to
taking the necessary measures for the conservation of the living resources concerned.

Concerning Straddling Stocks and Highly Migratory Species, the Convention states that `it
is the responsibility of States whose nationals are engaged in the fishing of these resources
in the high seas and the coastal States involved to negotiate directly or through sub-regional
or regional fisheries organizations to agree upon the measures necessary for the
conservation of these resources' (UNCLOS Art. 63 and 64) respectively. The basic issue
that must be tackled if expectations and needs in this respect are to be will realised is that
of controlling open access to fisheries. The extension of national jurisdiction was a good
but insufficient step towards this aim, and open access continues to exist within exclusive
zones of most coastal States as well as on the high seas. The results of continued open
access are seriously damaging. These can lead to further depletion of marine stocks, the
dissipation of economic rents and increased conflicts among States. With no price or value
placed on the resource, capital and labour will continue to enter the fishery as long as
revenues exceed costs, leading to wasteful misallocations of inputs. There is therefore an
urgent need to address the problems related to free and open access and to review and
establish alternative management concepts and mechanisms, especially property allocation
systems including exclusive use rights. Without further efforts to control the concept of
open access, the survival of the living resources of the sea is in danger.
                                                                                                                             64

3.5 Summary
From the discussion in this unit, it has been established that the freedom of the seas is one
the fundamental principles of the seas. It is strategic and central in the economic and
political activities of States in the highs. It among other things ensures cooperation among
the users of the sea and allows for wider participation of states in the economic and
scientific activities of the seas. In this unit, we discussed the various ways in which the
doctrine of the freedom of the high seas is important mankind. The doctrine is important
especially in economic and political activities of States. The doctrine has close correlation
with the issue of the conservation of the living resources of the sea.

3.6 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
1. James Leroy Young, Freedom of the Seas (2014) encyclopedia.1914-1918-online.net

      > article > freedom.
2. D.P. O'Connell and I.A. Shearer, The International Law of the Sea, (Oxford: OUP,

      1985).

3.7 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    A) The doctrine of the freedom of the sea is important to man in two major aspects:
   i. Economically: The economic implication and importance of the freedom of the

            sea is that greater number of States including those that are land-locked can
            partake in the exploration and us of the high seas and in the exploitation of its
            resources. This invariably will add to the economic growth of the individual
            nations and by implication the international economy.
   ii. Politically: This doctrine of the freedom of the high sea forbids any nations from
            asserting jurisdiction on other users of the seas except as allowed by the law.
            Also, no State can validly lay claim to any portions of the high sea to the
            exclusion of others. This indeed is the basis for cooperation among sovereign
            States on the high seas ensuring the peaceful uses of the high seas as
            contemplated by the Charter of the United Nations which the UNCLOS builds
            upon.

    B) The freedom of the high seas includes the right of States to engage in fishing,
        navigations and other lawful activities. This must be done with due respect and
        regard to the need for the conservation and management of the living resources of
                                                                                                                             65

        the high seas in line with articles 116 to 120 of UNCLOS concerning the measures
        for the conservation of the living resources of the high seas

Unit 4: Limitations and Exemptions to the Freedom of the Sea

4.1 Introduction
The basic concept of the freedom of the high seas is limited by the operation of a series of
exceptions, likewise the principle of the exclusivity of the flag-state jurisdiction under the
international law of the sea. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea under
its Article 92 (1) stipulates that `ships shall sail under the flag of one state only and, save
in exceptional cases expressly provided for in international treaties or in this Convention,
shall be subject to its exclusive jurisdiction on the high seas'. Thus this basic doctrine
relating to jurisdiction on the high seas which states that vessels on the high seas are subject
only to the authority of the flag State is not without some exceptions, except in the case of
warships which are not used for merchant purpose. Even the wider concept of the freedom
of the high seas is also limited by exercise of a series of exceptions (M N Shaw, 2004) P.
549. When a ship is involved in certain criminal acts leading to the existence of any of the
under-listed exceptions, the above basic concept of the freedom of the sea and exclusivity
of the flag-state jurisdiction can no longer hold sway.

4.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Enumerate, and
    ii. Explain each of the various circumstances that would constitute limitation to the

            principle of the freedom of the sea and exclusivity of flag-state jurisdiction.

4.3 Limitations to the Freedom of the Sea

The general doctrine of the freedom of the seas is however, subject to certain limitations
and exceptions as highlighted below:

Self-Assessment Exercise

     1. How does piracy relate to the jurisdictional freedom of the high sea?
     2. Who has the right to seize a pirate vessel?
     3. Based on the rule of right of visit, mention the circumstances that would

          justify a warship boarding a foreign ship on the high sea.
                                                                                                                             66

4.3.1 Right of visit

This is the right granted to warships under customary international law to approach and
ascertain the nationality of ships in the high seas. However, the right of approach, to
identify vessels, does not automatically incorporate the right to board or visit ships. Such
visit may be undertaken under certain circumstances such as: in the absence of hostilities
between the flag States of the warship and a merchant vessel and in the absence of special
treaty providing to the contrary, where the ship is engaged in piracy or the slave trade, or,
though flying a foreign flag or no flag at all, is indeed of the same nationality as the warship
or of no nationality. However, the warship should always exercise some caution in such
circumstances, since it may be liable to pay compensation for any loss or damage sustained
if its suspicions are unfounded and the ship boarded has not committed any act justifying
such suspicions. Article 110 of the Convention provides to this effect that:

        1. Except where acts of interference derive from powers conferred by
        treaty, a warship which encounters on the high seas a foreign ship, other
        than a ship entitled to complete immunity in accordance with articles
        95 and 96, is not justified in boarding it unless there is reasonable
        ground for suspecting that:

        (a) the ship is engaged in piracy;
        (b) the ship is engaged in the slave trade;
        (c) the ship is engaged in unauthorized broadcasting and the flag State

           of the warship has jurisdiction under article 109;
        (d) the ship is without nationality; or
        (e) though flying a foreign flag or refusing to show its flag, the ship is,

            in reality, of the same nationality as the warship.

        2. In the cases provided for in paragraph 1, the warship may proceed
        to verify the ship's right to fly its flag. To this end, it may send a boat
        under the command of an officer to the suspected ship. If suspicion
        remains after the documents have been checked, it may proceed to a
        further examination onboard the ship, which must be carried out with
        all possible consideration.
        3. If the suspicions prove to be unfounded, and provided that the ship
        boarded has not committed any act justifying them, it shall be
        compensated for any loss or damage that may have been sustained.

        4. These provisions apply mutatis mutandis to military aircraft.
                                                                                                                             67

        5. These provisions also apply to any other duly authorized ships or
        aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as being on government service.

4.3.2 Piracy

Piracy in its original and strict meaning is every unauthorized act of violence committed
by a private vessel on the high seas against another vessel with intent to plunder
animofurandi (D J Harris, 2004). According to Article 101 of the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, Piracy consists of any of the following acts:

          (a) any illegal acts of violence or detention, or any act of depredation,
                 committed for private ends by the crew or the passengers of a
                 private ship or a private aircraft, and directed:

             (i) on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or against persons
                 or property on board such ship or aircraft;

             (ii) against a ship, aircraft, persons or property in a place outside the
                 jurisdiction of any State;

          (b) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of
                 an aircraft with knowledge of facts making it a pirate ship or
                 aircraft;

          (c) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described
                 in subparagraph (a) or (b).

4.3.3 Pirate Vessel

A vessel whether ship or aircraft is treated as a pirate vessel if it is intended by the persons
in dominant control to be used for the purpose of committing one of the acts referred to in
Article 101of the UNCLOS. The same applies if the ship or aircraft has been used to
commit any such act, so long as it remains under the control of the persons guilty of that
act (Article 103).

Piracy constitutes a very formidable exception to the exclusive jurisdiction of the flag State
and the principle of the freedom of the high seas (M N Shaw, 2004) p. 549. The essence of
or what amounts to piracy under international law is that it must be committed for private
ends, that is to say, it is not committed to serve the political purpose of other States. Where
therefore a vessel involves in piracy, any and every State may seize such private ship or
                                                                                                                             68

aircraft whether on the high seas or on terra nullius and arrest the persons and seize the
property on board.

    i. Seizure of a Pirate Vessel

Whether on the high seas or in any other place beyond the jurisdiction of any State, every
State may seize a pirate vessel, (a ship or aircraft) taken by piracy and under the control of
pirates, and arrest the persons and seize the property on board. The courts of the State which
carried out the seizure may decide what penalties to be imposed, and may also determine
the action to be taken in relation to the ships, aircraft or property, subject to the rights of
third parties acting in good faith. See Article 105 of the Convention. However, only
warships or military aircraft, or other ships or aircraft clearly marked and identifiable as
being on government service and authorized to that effect have the right to seize on account
of piracy.

    ii. Liability for wrongful seizure

Article 106 of the Convention provides that where the seizure of a ship or aircraft on
suspicion of piracy has been effected without adequate grounds, the State making the
seizure shall be liable to the State the nationality of which is possessed by the ship or
aircraft for any loss or damage caused by the seizure.

4.3.4 Hot Pursuit
The right of hot pursuit of a foreign ship is a principle in international law designed to
ensure that a vessel which has infringed the laws of a coastal State does not evade
punishment by fleeing to the high seas. In this circumstance, a coastal State's jurisdiction
is extended onto the high seas to enable it pursue and seize a ship which is reasonably
suspected of infringing its laws. The right of hot pursuit is covered by Article 111 of the
1982 Convention built upon Article 23 of the High Seas Convention, 1958. Hot pursuit
may only begin when the pursuing ship has satisfied itself that the ship being pursued or
one of its boats is within the limits of internal waters, territorial sea, contiguous zone or
economic zone or on the continental shelf of the coastal State, and may only continue in
that pursuit outside the territorial sea or such other zones if it is uninterrupted. Where the
pursuit commences while the foreign ship is in the continuous zone, it may only be
undertaken or justified if there has been any form of violation of the rights for the protection
of which the zone was established. The right may commence in a similar way from the
archipelagic waters. It is however, essential that prior to that chase, a visual or auditory
signal to ship has been given at a distance enabling it to be seen or heard by the foreign
                                                                                                                             69

ship and pursuit may be undertaken by warships or military aircrafts or by specially
authorized government ships or planes. The right of hot pursuit terminates as soon as the
ship pursued has entered the territorial waters of its own or that of a Third State.

It should be reiterated here that,

    a. the hot pursuit of a foreign ship may only be undertaken when the competent
        authorities of the coastal State have reasonable grounds to believe that the ship has
        violated the laws and regulations of that State.

    b. Such pursuit must be commenced when the foreign ship or one of its boats is within
        the internal waters, the archipelagic waters, the territorial sea or the contiguous zone
        of the pursuing State, and

    c. may only be continued outside the territorial sea or the contiguous zone if the pursuit
        has not been interrupted.

It is not necessary that, at the time when the foreign ship within the territorial sea or the
contiguous zone receives the order to stop, the ship giving the order should likewise be
within the territorial sea or the contiguous zone. If the foreign ship is within a contiguous
zone, as defined in Article 33 of UNCLOS, the pursuit may only be undertaken if there has
been a violation of the rights for the protection of which the zone was established
(paragraph 1, Article 111).

4.3.5 Unauthorised Broadcasting
It is the position of the law that all States are to co-operate in the suppression of
unauthorized broadcasting from the high seas. This unauthorized broadcasting is defined
as transmission of sound radio or television from a ship or installation on the high seas
intended for reception by the general public, contrary to international regulations, but
excluding the transmission of distress calls. Paragraph 2 of Article 109 of the Convention
defined unauthorized broadcasting as the transmission of sound radio or television
broadcasts from a ship or installation on the high seas intended for reception by the
general public contrary to international regulations, but excluding the transmission
of distress calls. In accordance with paragraph 3, any person engaged in unauthorised
broadcasting may be prosecuted before the court of:

    a. the flag State of the ship,
    b. the State of registry of the installation,
    c. the State of which the person is a national,
    d. any State where the transmission can reach/be received, or
                                                                                                                             70

    e. any State where authorized radio communication is suffering interference.

Any of the above States having jurisdiction may arrest any person or ship engaging in
unauthorized broadcasting on the high seas and seize the broadcasting apparatus. States
may enter treaty allowing each other's warships to exercise certain powers of visit and
search any vessels flying the flags of the signatories to the treaty (M N Shaw, 2004) p. 552.

Article 11 of the High Seas Convention provides to the effect that where ships involved in
collisions on the high seas, the penal or disciplinary proceedings may only be taken against
the master or other persons in the service of the ship by the authorities of either the flag
State or the State of which the person in question is a national. The law further provides
that in such a case, no arrest or detention of the ship even for investigations can be ordered
by any other than the authorities of the flag State. Article 97 of UNCLOS reaffirms the
above stance.

4.4. Pollution

Pollution represents another instance in which States are enjoined to assume corporate
responsibility or jurisdiction for the purpose of its prevention. For instance, Article 24 of
the1958 Convention on the High Seas as well as Article 194 of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 provide to the effect that States shall take,
individually and jointly as appropriate, all measures consistent with the Convention that
are necessary to prevent, reduce and control pollution of the marine environment from any
source, using for this purpose the best practicable means at their disposal and in accordance
with their capabilities. The law also enjoins states to endeavour to harmonise their policies
in this connection (M N Shaw, 2004) pp.553-555.

4.4.1 Straddling Stock

The development of the exclusive economic zone led to the reduction of the limit of the
high seas under the legal regime of the sea. One of the implications of this development is
that the bulk of fish stocks are now found within the exclusive economic zones of coastal
states. Consequently, the interests of these coastal States have now been unavoidably
extended to impinge upon the regulation of the high seas. The present law of the sea
therefore grants the coastal States the sovereign rights over their exclusive economic zones
for the purpose of exploration, exploitation, conservation and management of the fish
stocks found within the zone (UNCLOS Art. 56 {1}). The rights given to the coastal states
are accompanied by the duties to take such conservation and management to ensure that
the fish stocks found in the exclusive economic zones are not endangered by reason of
                                                                                                                             71

over-exploitation and that such stocks are maintained at, or restored to, levels which can
produce the maximum sustainable yield (UNCLOS Art. 61)

The freedom to fish on the high seas is therefore qualified by the rights and duties as well
as the interests of the coastal states as stated above (UNCLOS Art. 116 {b}). A particular
concern is given with regard to straddling stocks that is stocks of fish that straddle both
exclusive economic zone and the high seas. The argument being that if the later were not
regulated in some way, fishery stocks regularly present in the exclusive economic zones
could be depleted through over-exploitation (UNCLOS Art. 117 -120).

4.5 Summary
From our discussion in this unit, we discovered that the basic principle of the freedom of
the high seas and the similar concept of the exclusivity of the flag-state jurisdiction are not
after all absolute but are subject to several qualifications. Where any of the circumstances
as recognized by the relevant law arises, it will operate against the exercise of the rights to
freely use the high seas or the exclusive jurisdiction conferred on the Flag-State. In this
unit, we discussed: Limitations to the freedom of the high seas and Exemptions to the
concept of the exclusivity of the flag-state jurisdiction

4.6 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

 1. D J Harris, Cases and Materials on International Law (6th edn London:
        Sweat and Maxwell Ltd, 2004).

 2. W T Burke, International Law of Fisheries, (Oxford, 1994)
 3. F O Vicuna, The changing International Law of High Seas Fisheries, (Cambridge,

        1999).
 4. J C Woodlife, `The Demise of Unauthorized Broadcasting from Ships in

        International Waters', (1986) 1 Journal of Estuarine and Coastal Law, 402. ;
        UNCLOS Art. 109 (1)-(4)
 5. W C Gilmore, `Hot Pursuit: The Case of R v Mills and Others' (1995) 44 ICLQ,
        949.
 6. N Poulantzas, The Right of Hot Pursuit in International Law (2nd edn,
        The Hague: Martinus Njihoff, 2002).

4.7 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise
                                                                                                                             72

1. Piracy refers to every unauthorized act of violence committed by a private vessel on
the high seas against another vessel with intent to plunder. See article 101of the UNCLOS
for more definition. Piracy is inimical to the peaceful uses of the sea as contemplated by
the UNCLOS and therefore constitutes an exception to the exclusive jurisdiction of the flag
State and the principle of the freedom of the high seas. Pirate vessel is therefore subject to
universal jurisdiction.

2. Being subject to universal jurisdiction, every State has jurisdiction to seize a pirate
vessel whether on the high sea or any other zone outside the jurisdiction of any State. Read
Article 105 of the UNCLOS.

3. A warship can justifiably board a foreign ship on the high only under a circumstance
warranting reasonable ground for suspecting that:

        (i) the ship is engaged in piracy;
        (ii) the ship is engaged in the slave trade;
        (iii) the ship is engaged in unauthorized broadcasting and the flag State

            of the warship has jurisdiction under article 109;
        (iv) the ship is without nationality; or
        (v) though flying a foreign flag or refusing to show its flag, the ship is, in reality,

             of the same nationality as the warship
                                                                                                                             73

Unit 5: Piracy, Slave Trade and Freedom of the Sea

5.1 Introduction

While slave trade involves the capturing, selling, and buying of enslaved persons, piracy
is an act of robbery or criminal violence by ship or boat-borne attackers upon another ship
or a coastal area, typically with the goal of stealing cargo and other valuable items or
properties. The seas are typically the arena for the operation of these crimes. This principle
of freedom of the seas normally forbids visit and search of foreign merchant vessels on the
high seas in time of peace. However, where ships involve in piracy slave trade, such ships
will lose the privilege of using the high seas freely.

5.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of the unit you are expected to be able to:

    i. Further appreciate the meaning of piracy
    ii. Discuss the term `slave trade']
    iii. Relate them to the concept of freedom of the seas

5.3 Piracy
The existing international law on piracy is found in the provisions of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Seas 1982 (Arts. 100-107) although the UNCLOS is not the
first to make provisions on the subject matter. We had already considered piracy in the
previous unit wherein it is stated to mean any unauthorized act of violence committed by a
private vessel on the high seas against another vessel with intent to plunder animofurandi
(D J Harris, 2004). Any ship that involves in piracy will be stripped off the general right
to use the high seas freely. It therefore constitutes a formidable exception to the basic
principle of the freedom of the seas. Peter and Smallman writing about piracy maintained
that, `Piracy, in particular, threatens the freedom of the seas, increases the cost of
international business, endangers political security through corruption, and could trigger a
major environmental disaster if carried out in congested maritime corridors traversed by
heavily laden oil tankers' (P Chalk and L Smallman, 2009).
                                                                                                                             74

Self-Assessment Exercise

              1. How do States combat the menace of slave trade under the present regime
                  of the sea?

              2. Discuss the relation between slave trade and piracy

Piracy serves as one of the major threats to international trade, and maritime security and
to the freedom of the seas. Piracy threatens maritime security and the legitimate uses of the
seas for peaceful purposes and the freedom of navigation as contemplated by the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. International piracy law is international law
that is meant to protect against piracy. It was enacted primarily by the United Nations and
UNCLOS, and defines different types of piracy and ways to combat the menace. The 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides for the laws of
piracy under its Articles 100 to 110 which are a replica of Articles 14 to 21 of the 1958
Geneva Convention on the High seas. According to Article 101 of the UNCLOS:

Piracy consists of any of the following acts:

        (a) any illegal acts of violence or detention, or any act of
            depredation, committed for private ends by the crew or the
            passengers of a private ship or a private aircraft, and directed:

        (i) on the high seas, against another ship or aircraft, or against

          persons or property on board such ship or aircraft;

        (ii) against a ship, aircraft, persons or property in a place outside the
            jurisdiction of any State;

        (b) any act of voluntary participation in the operation of a ship or of
            an aircraft with knowledge of facts making it a pirate ship or
             aircraft;

        (c) any act of inciting or of intentionally facilitating an act described
            in subparagraph (a) or (b)."
                                                                                                                             75

The summary here is that, piracy is inimical to concept of the freedom of the high seas and
the principle of the exclusive jurisdiction of the flag-state. Any State can therefore seize a
pirate ship or aircraft whether on the high seas or on terra nullius and arrest the persons
and seize the property on board. Furthermore, the courts of the state which carried out the
arrest would have the jurisdiction to impose penalties and may determine the action to be
taken regarding the ship or air craft and the property.

5.4 Slave Trade
The term slave trade is defined in the 1926 Slavery Convention, particularly by
Article 2 as follow:

          The slave trade includes all acts involved in the capture,
          acquisition or disposal of a person with intent to reduce him to
          slavery; all acts involved in the acquisition of a slave with a view
          to selling or exchanging him; all acts of disposal by sale or
          exchange of a slave acquired with a view to being sold or
          exchanged, and, in general, every act of trade or transport in slaves

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 in its Article 99 enjoins that
every State shall take effective measures to prevent and punish the transport of slaves in
ships authorized to fly its flag and to prevent the unlawful use of its flag for that purpose.
Therefore, any slave taking refuge on board any ship, whatever its flag, shall ipso facto be
free. This is also the provision of Article 13 of the High Seas Convention of 1958.
According to Article 110 of the UNCLOS, warships may board foreign merchant ships
under a reasonable suspicion of engaging in the slave trade and offenders must be handed
over to the flag-state for trial. From the foregoing it is established that slave trade is another
formidable exception to the general concept of the freedom of the seas.

5.5 Relations between freedom of the sea, piracy and slave trade

The relations among the three terms can be seen in the fact that while the concept of the
freedom of the seas makes the high seas open and accessible to all states, so that any ship
can freely sail the high seas unmolested, both piracy and slave trade constitute such
formidable exception to this high seas rule. As we noted above, the high seas are mainly
the arena for the commission of these crimes. There has been some confusion as to whether
the act of piracy can take place on land within the territorial integrity of any state. The
definition given to piracy by W. E. hall suggests that piracy can occur in a State's land
territory (W. E. Hall, 1880), a notion which has been rejected by many other writers.
                                                                                                                             76

According to him, `pirates are persons who deprecate by sea or land without authority from
a sovereign'. Thomas Joseph however argued that the mark of a piratical act is that it must
be one outside the territorial jurisdiction of any civilized state. `And commenting on Hall's
view, Joseph noted that Hall seemed to hold the view that a descent from the sea on to the
coast of a state to rob and destroy without any national authorization would be accounted
as piratical, but that surely the fact that the crime was committed within the territorial
jurisdiction would make the perpetrators amenable to the law of the state and not
international law' (L Azubuike, 2009) p. 47. The idea therefore is that the offence of piracy
must be committed on high seas which is an international zone and that is why it is subject
to universal jurisdiction. The high seas are the arena for both slave trade and piracy and the
both constitute exceptions to the basic principle of the freedom of the high seas.

Additionally, piracy usually involves violence which can be a means of gaining control
over persons on the high seas and subject same to conditions of slavery. For instance, the
inclusion of the words: "all acts involved in the ... acquisition ... of a person with intent to
reduce him to slavery" in the definition of slave trade above broadens the scope of the slave
trade beyond the mercantile sense of trading and transporting slaves (Cullen, 2012).
Bearing in mind, that slavery extends to the de facto condition, and that it exists on a
continuum with other forms of severe exploitation such as piracy, it is right to argue that
the slave trade thus encompasses the acquisition of vulnerable persons through manning
agents with the intention to reduce them to conditions amounting to slavery (Douglas,
2017).

5.6 Summary
From the discussion in this unit, we understand that the act of piracy must be committed
on the high seas which constitute an area beyond national jurisdiction. So the relations
between the offences of piracy, slave trade and the freedom of the high seas is that they
always take place on the high seas but are not in any stretch covered by the freedom of the
high seas concept. They, especially, piracy today constitute a grave danger to the concept
of the freedom of the high seas. In this unit, we discussed: Piracy, Slave trade, and the
relation among them.

5.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

    1. D J Harris, Cases and Materials on International Law (6th edn London: Sweat and
        Maxwell Ltd, 2004).
                                                                                                                             77

    2. Lawrence Azubuike, `International Law Regime against Piracy', (2009) Annual
        Survey of International & Comparative Law, Vol. 15. p.47.

    3. W. E. Hall, International Law, 214 -215 (Oxford University Press, 1880).
    4. B. H. Dubner, The Law of International Sea Piracy, (The Hague: 1979).
    5. https://www.un.org/depts/los/convention_agreements/texts/unclos/part7.htm

        United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, Part VII, High Seas, Section I,
        General Provisions, Article 88. United Nations. Retrieved 1 May 2020.
    6. Peter Chalk and Laurence Smallman, Piracy still Threatens the Freedom of the Seas
        (April 3, 2009) at www.rand.org > blog > 2009/04 > piracy-still-threatens.

1 Douglas Macfarlane, "The Slave Trade and the Right of Visit Under the Law of the
    Sea Convention: Exploitation in the Fishing Industry in New Zealand and Thailand",
    (2017), Asian Journal of International Law, Volume 7, Issue 1

2 Cullen, Holly, Contemporary International Norms of Slavery" in Jean ALLAIN, ed.,
    The Legal Understanding of Slavery: From the Historical to the Contemporary
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2012), at 307

5.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. States can effectively fight the menace of slave particularly under article 99 of the
        UNCLOS by taking effective measures to prevent and punish the transport of slaves
        in ships authorized to fly their flag and by preventing any unlawful use of their
        flagged ships for that purpose.

    2. Both piracy and slave trade constitute exception to doctrine of the freedom the
        high seas and the principle of the exclusive jurisdiction of the flag-state. in other
        words, both the two are inimical to the concept of the freedom of the high sea and
        consequently subject to universal jurisdiction.
                                                                                                                             78

MODULE 3: USES OF THE HIGH SEAS AND THE SEABED

Unit 1: Navigation and Fisheries in the High Seas

1.1 Introduction

The concept of the freedom of the high seas as discussed in the preceding module pre-
supposes that the high seas are important for State exploration and use. States having
freedom to freely access the high seas go there to put the seas into various uses. The high
seas can be put into numerous uses such as navigation, fisheries, scientific research and
experiment, exploitation of natural resources in the seabed, disposal of radioactive waste
where this is adjudged safe, laying of submarine cables & pipelines, and mechanical
installations. The principle of the freedom of the high seas is now recognized to include
freedom of navigation, fishing, and other economic and scientific uses to which the high
seas can offer. Traditionally, the high seas are beyond the territorial waters of all states so
are regarded as open to all States. Under this unit, we will examine the concepts of freedom
of navigation and fishing on the high seas.

1.2Learning Outcomes
At the completion of the unit, you are expected to be able to:

        i. The rights every sovereign State has to navigate the high seas, and
        ii. The rights of States to fish on the high seas
1.3 Freedom of Navigation on the High Seas
Freedom of navigation is a customary international law principle which declares that ships
flying the flag of any sovereign State shall not suffer interference from other states, apart
from those exceptions provided for in international law (A J Hoffmann, 2011). The concept
provides ships of any States with the right to traverse the high seas with no or minimal
interference from any other State. A key aspect of freedom of navigation as provided for
under Articles 92 (1) of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and Article
6 (1) of the High Seas Convention is that it is exercised under the exclusive jurisdiction of
the flag State. The Permanent Court of International Justice (PCIJ) in The `Lotus' (France
v Turkey) (1927) held that, except in limited instances expressly recognized by
                                                                                                                             79

international law, ships on the high seas are not subject to any authority other than the State
whose flag they fly. For a ship to fly the flag of a State there must be a genuine link between
the State and the ship (Art. 91 (1) UN Convention on the Law of the Sea). In the realm of
international law, it has been defined as "freedom of movement for vessels, freedom to
enter ports and to make use of plant and docks, to load and unload goods and to transport
goods and passengers. This right is now also codified as Article 87(1) of the 1982 United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and stated that "The high seas are open to all
States, whether coastal or land-locked" and lists "freedom of navigation" as one of the
several rights for all States on the high seas. Article 90 of the Convention provides that,
`Every State, whether coastal or land-locked, has the right to sail ships flying its flag on
the high seas'. Freedom of navigation came to be embodied in bilateral treaties to become
part of what has today become known as international law. Many treaties have already
existed between countries centuries ago concerning free navigation during which `free ship
free goods' principle was recognized. This culminated in 1982, when freedom of
navigation became part of the broader body of laws of the sea presently embodied in the
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) as already stated.

Freedom of Navigation as established under the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea has been a trade-off between the developed and the developing world (W Christian,
2019). The Pacific Review 32.4 (2019): 475­504. Under this understanding, the developed
world had an interest in a maximum of their freedom to sail and explore the seas the
developing world wanted to protect their offshore resources and their independence. In
other words, it was a conflict between understanding the seas through the principle of mare
liberum that asserts the oceans to be open to all nations or mare clausum that advocates
that the seas should be under the sovereignty of a state. The UNCLOS upheld freedom of
navigation on the high seas but also invented different zones of sovereignty that limited the
rules of foreign ships in these waters with concepts like internal waters and Exclusive
Economic Zones (EEZ) (G Munriaj, 2016). Additionally, navigation rights of warships
were guaranteed on the high seas with complete immunity from the jurisdiction of any
State other than the flag State.

The Convention introduced a number of legal concepts that allowed freedom of navigation
within and outside of the maritime jurisdictions of States. They include:

    a. right of innocent passage,
    b. right of transit passage,
    c. right of archipelagic sea lanes passage, and
    d. freedom of the high seas.
                                                                                                                             80

The right of innocent passage grants ships the freedom to travel in other States territorial
seas if it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the costal State. However,
some countries like China demand that warships to obtain prior authorization before they
enter Chinese national waters ((G Munriaj, 2016). Transit passage refers to passage through
straits used for international navigation between one part of the high seas or an exclusive
economic zone (EEZ) and another with more relaxed criteria for passage. The passage must
be continuous and expeditious transit of the strait. With archipelagic sea lanes passage
archipelagic States may provide sea-lanes and air-routes passage though their waters were
ships can enjoy freedom of navigation (F. Eleanor & F. Andrew, 217).

Self-Assessment Exercise

            1. Discuss the freedom of fishing on the high seas
            2. Identify the pre-requisite conditions for the exercise of the right of

                 navigation in the high sea.

1.4 Conditions for the Exercise of Navigation Rights on the High seas
Even in the high seas, freedom of navigation is not without some qualifications. Although
under the Convention, the high seas are free and open to all States, whether coastal or land-
locked, and no State may validly purport to appropriate any part thereof to its sovereignty
(A J Hoffmann, 2011). The freedoms under this present legal regime must be exercised
subject to certain conditions laid down by the United Nations Convention on the Law of
the Sea and by other rules of international law (Art. 82 (1) UN Convention on the Law of
the Sea). States exercising their navigation rights in the high seas must therefore do so with
due regard for the interests of other States in their exercise of high seas freedoms. This
principle of due or reasonable regard, as provided for, under Article 87 (2) of the United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and Article 2 of the High Seas Convention, is
similar to that applied in the exclusive economic zone (EEZ) and seeks to maintain the
balance between the rights and interests of States when exercising their respective high
seas freedoms (A J Hoffmann, 2011). It further ensures that the rights of others are
protected with respect to activities in the International Seabed Area in accordance with
Article 87 (2) of the UNCLOS. This principle provides an objective test which international
courts and tribunals may apply where there is a conflict between two uses of the high seas.
                                                                                                                             81

1.5 Freedom of Fishing on the High Seas
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea also recognizes the free access and
the freedom of fishing on the high seas to all States. The Convention however calls upon
all States and particularly upon States fishing to cooperate in the conservation and
management of fishery resources occurring in the high seas. International law of the sea
however limits the right of States to authorise their nationals to engage in fishing on the
high seas. This right must be exercised subject to conditions such as:

    a. setting appropriate conservation and management measures, and
    b. cooperating with other relevant States.

`Management of high seas fisheries is in most areas done through competent regional
fisheries management organisations (RFMOs), who thereby play a key role in high seas
fisheries and whose measures are relevant for all States, including non-members'(S.
Asmundsson). Article 87 (1) of the Convention provides in respect of the freedom of
fishing on High Seas which must be exercised subject to the conditions laid down in section
2 of the Convention. Also Article 116 of the Convention explicitly establishes that the
right of States to authorise their nationals to fish on the high seas is subject to specific
limitations. It provides that:

        All States have the right for their nationals to engage in fishing on the
        high seas subject to:

        (a) their treaty obligations;

        (b) the rights and duties as well as the interests of coastal States
        provided for, inter alia, in article 63, paragraph 2, and articles 64 to
        67; and

        (c) the provisions of this section.

Article 63 (2) of the Convention provides to the effect that:

             Where the same stock or stocks of associated species occur both within
             the exclusive economic zone and in an area beyond and adjacent to the
             zone, the coastal State and the States fishing for such stocks in the
             adjacent area shall seek, either directly or through appropriate
             subregional or regional organizations, to agree upon the measures
             necessary for the conservation of these stocks in the adjacent area.
                                                                                                                             82

The necessary implication of the above provision is that States simply do not possess
automatic right to authorise their nationals to fish on the high seas until they fulfill the
conditions laid down in the relevant article. The freedom to fish on the high seas is therefore
limited by the rights and duties as well as the interests of the coastal states with whom the
States fishing in the high seas must cooperate on best measures to be adopted.

1.6 Summary

Freedom of navigation and that of fishing remain an essential principle of international law
established to ensure public order in the world oceans. Notwithstanding the expansion of
maritime zones and the extension of coastal State jurisdiction over large areas of the sea
with the creation of the exclusive economic zones, the right of States to navigate and fish
on the high seas without undue interference is guaranteed in the relevant provisions of the
present legal regime of the sea. These provisions are designed not only to regulate the often
divergent state interest on high seas but also to ensure that the balance between them is
maintained. Any emerging challenges not envisaged or regulated by the present legal
regime of the sea may require additional measures that would permit States to legally
intervene and to exercise legislative and enforcement jurisdiction over suspected ships.
However, any security-related initiatives States may wish to adopt on the high seas or
within their jurisdictional zones must to be in conformity with accepted norms and
principles of international law. In this unit, we discussed: Freedom to navigate on the high
seas, and freedom to fish on the high seas

1.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

    1. Albert J Hoffmann, `Navigation Freedom.', (2011) Max plank Encyclopedia of
        Public International Law.

    2. Freund Eleanor & Facini Andrew. "Freedom of navigation in the South China
        Sea: A practical guide", (2017) Belfer Center for Science and International
        Affairs, Harvard Kennedy School.

    3. Gill, Munraj "The Issue of Freedom of Navigation in the Asia-Pacific Region: The
        Rights and the Interest of Costal States and Practices." (2016), The Journal of
        Defence and Security 7.1 66­III.

    4. Wirth Christian. "Whose `Freedom of Navigation'? Australia, China, the United
        States and the Making of Order in the `Indo-Pacific.'"
                                                                                                                             83

1.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. The UNCLOS recognizes the free access to and the freedom of fishing on the high
        seas to all States. However, this must be done with a kind of coordinated
        international cooperation for the conservation of the fishery resources occurring in
        the high seas. This right must therefore be exercised subject to certain conditions
        such as:

           i. Setting appropriate conservation and management measures, and
           ii. Cooperating with other relevant States. Read article 116 of the UNCLOS

    2. Under customary international law, there is this principle of freedom of navigation
        by which ships flying the flag of any sovereign State shall sail freely and not to
        suffer interference from other States. This freedom must however be exercised
        subject to certain conditions. States exercising the said right must do so with due
        regard for the interests of other States in their exercise of high seas freedoms. Read
        article 87 (2) of the UNCLOS.
                                                                                                                             84

Unit 2: Exploitation of other Economic resources in the High Seas and the
         Seabed

2.1 Introduction
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the sea has established an international legal
regime for the world's oceans. This comprehensive legal regime formed the basis of an
international programme of action on the sustainable development of the resources and
uses of the seas as laid out in the Convention. The United Nations Division for Ocean
Affairs and the Law of the Sea (UNDOALS) of the Office of Legal Affairs has developed
a programme of activities for the realization by States of benefits under the legal regime
and the programme of action established by the Convention. One area where potential
benefits assumed a crucial role in the formulation of the legal regime in the Convention
and its elaboration is that of marine mineral resources. The potential for the realization of
benefits from these resources has expanded considerably both in areas within national
jurisdiction and in the international area due mainly to advancement in scientific
discoveries. We will examine here how the marine resources beyond national jurisdiction
are exploited under the present sea regime.

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Identify the economic resources of the high seas and seabed
    ii. Appreciate how these resources can be exploited
    iii. Have first-hand knowledge of the body that mans the activities in on the seabed.

2.3 Identification of the High Seas and Seabed Resources
The world seas are wondrously rich with diverse resources both living and non-living. The
seas serve as a source of energy and natural resources, and play a crucial role in global
weather patterns, although they are under some threats from over consumption of certain
living resources, pollution and climate change (R Wolfrum, 2012). The world has scarcely
begun to explore what the seas contain in terms of marine life and resources. However,
some flexible legal frameworks and sophisticated scientific models are seriously required
to deal adequately with these changes, to ease conflict and guarantee sustainable use of the
sea.
                                                                                                                             85

Study shows that more than seventy percent of the Earth's surface is covered with seawater.
It therefore has a huge influence on life on our planet. However, the potential wealth
available in the sea is largely untapped and even unexplored yet by man. This is partly
because of the logistical difficulties and the specialist equipment needed to reach all areas.
Reserves of gas and oil have not been fully identified and man has not yet begun to exploit
alternative energy sources in the seas such as thermal, wind, wave or tidal energy,
significantly, let alone the mineral stores beneath the sea bed (R Wolfrum, 2012). The sea
contains large amounts of mineral resources. Based on potential recoverable reserves of
one thousand to five thousand billion barrels, there is likely four hundred to six hundred
billion barrels of oil offshore, and possibly as much as two trillion. It has been estimated
that eight percent or more of these reserves are within 200 nautical miles offshore (the
evolving boundary between coastal State and international jurisdiction over economic
resources in the sea) (J Johnston, 1980). This and more estimates still leave a substantial
portion of the resources, up to twenty percent, in the seabed, though one expert had
expressed doubts as to whether these reserves will ever become commercially recoverable
(F Singer, 1981). In any event, the value of the sea deposits of oil is immense, and would be
worth between fourteen and seventeen trillion dollars, at a price of thirty-five dollars per
barrel. Significant mineral deposits also lie on the ocean basin ­ the deep seabed. The most
important of these mineral resources are manganese nodules. Estimation shows that the
Pacific Ocean has the richest deposits, containing one to one and a half trillion tones,
making this perhaps the largest mineral deposit on earth (W Hawkins, 1982). Nodules,
rounded mass of manganese oxide which form through chemical precipitates from the
ocean, accreting around objects such as bones, stones or teeth are also found on the seabed
of the Atlantic and Indian Oceans and an estimated 250 million metric tons of them are
found on America's outer continental shelf (W Hawkins, 1982).

Other rich deep seabed deposits have been discovered of recent. These include
Polymetallic sulfides found in the East Pacific, along the Juande Fuca Ridge, on the
Galapagos Rift off Ecuador, in the Guayamas Basin in the Gulf of California, and also in
the Red Sea (D Bandow, 1982). These minerals collect near volcanic hot springs, and
contain copper zinc, and silver in addition to sulfur. All these rich resources are necessary
for industrial purposes. It equally contains titanium, cerium, nickel, platinum,
manganese, thallium, tellurium and other rare earth elements.

The increased awareness and knowledge of these rich resources found in the sea and their
benefits account for the reason why nations of the world are developing stronger and
divergent interests in the seas. It is unfortunately however, that the value of these rich
                                                                                                                             86

mineral deposits in the seabed may remain theoretical for some time as only small fraction
of them are presently exploited due to some scientific, technical, economic and legal
limitations.

Self-Assessment Exercise

         1. The seabed resources are declared common heritage of mankind. Discuss.
         2. Enumerate the roles of the International Seabed Authority

2.3.1 Exploitation of Economic Resources of the Seabed

The amount of natural resources on and beneath the high seas is quite enormous. The
guideline for the exploitation of the living resources on the high seas has been explained
during our examination of the jurisdiction of the high seas. The degree of the rich resources
lying beneath the high seas has become more and more apparent in the recent years due to
scientific and technological advances. Such scientific advances in the past few decades
have actually revolutionalized the international community's knowledge and ability to
search for marine mineral resources. In some cases, applied science has found ways to
make some of these resources available to mankind through the development of new
technologies or the adaptation of existing ones for mining the mineral deposits concerned
and processing them to recover the valuable products that they contain. For mineral
resources found in the international seabed area the `Area', a legal framework has been
provided by the Convention. For polymetallic nodules, this framework and the Agreement
relating to its implementation have been used to develop a prospecting and exploration
code. For further development of this code, applied science (engineering) will have to
provide a solution to the problem of economically viable mining and processing
technologies (F. O. Agama, 2016) p. 147.

One important attribute of the mineral resources in the seabed is that they may occur both
in maritime areas under the jurisdiction of coastal States or in the international seabed Area
beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. It seems however that none of these minerals are
commercially mined yet, but a considerable amount of commercial interest has been
indicated in some of the deposits. What is essential before commercial exploration of these
minerals could actually commence is that the profitability of a mining operation is
                                                                                                                             87

established. The profitability will further depend upon a number of interrelated factors such
as:

    a. the characteristics of the mineral deposits,
    b. suitable technology to mine it,
    c. technology for processing the ore obtained from the deposit to extract the products

        of economic value,
    d. market conditions, and
    e. environmental considerations.

2.4 The International Seabed Authority

This was established under the Convention to organize, regulate and control all mineral-
related activities in the international seabed area beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 under its Part XI has declared the
seabed and its resources to be the common heritage of mankind as a whole. Thus no State
or natural or juridical person shall, acquire or exercise rights with respect to the minerals
recovered from the Area except in accordance with Part XI of the Convention (Art. 137
para 3 of the Convention). Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Convention,
activities in the seabed (Area) including exploitation of the mineral resources are carried
out for the benefit of mankind as a whole on whose behalf the International Seabed
Authority (the Authority) established under the Convention shall act. The Authority is to
provide for the equitable sharing of such benefits (Art. 40 of the Convention). In order to
control the activities of States and manage the resources in the `Area' the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea confers exclusive rights on the International Seabed
Authority (ISA), a body established under Section 4, Article 156 of the Convention for
that purpose. All States Parties to the Convention are ipso facto Members of the (ISA).
Exploitation of the seabed resources including every other activity in the Area are to be
carried out in accordance with the provisions of Article 153 by the Enterprise (i.e. the
Organ of the Authority established as its operating arm) and by State Parties or State
Enterprises, or persons possessing the nationality of States Parties or effectively controlled
by them, acting in association with the Authority.

2.5 Functions of the International Seabed Authority
The following are some of the numerous roles/functions of the Authority:

    a. To protect and conserve the natural resources of the Area
    b. To prevent damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment.
                                                                                                                             88

    c. Determination of area for exploration and making the exploration and ascertain that
        the exploration is commercially viable.

    d. To provide Information and data relating to International Seabed Area
    e. General administration of the mineral resources of the International Seabed Area

        which is the common heritage of mankind.
    f. Adopt rules, regulations as well as procedures for the conduct of activities in the

        Area.
    g. To promote and encourage marine scientific research in the Area.

2.6 Summary
The seas are great reservoir of natural resources-living and non-living. Some of them
include but not limited to salt, potassium, magnesium, sand and gravel, limestone and
gypsum, manganese nodule, phosphorites, metal deposit associated with volcanism and
seafloor vents, place gold, tin, titanium, and diamond. All these are in addition the
numerous living resources of the sea. Many of these mineral resources lye right beneath
the high seas and can amount to quite enormous economic fortune for the entire world
when the full scale exploitation commences. In this unit, we discussed: The resources of
the sea, exploitation of these resources and the International Seabed Authority in relation
to seabed activities

2.7 References/Further Readings

    1. R Wolfrum, `Understanding the Sea' Institute for Comparative Public Law and
        International Law, Heidelberg, Mailto. < Sekrewo@mpil.de>

    2. D Bandow, `Developing the Mineral Resources of the Seabed', (1982) 3Cato
        Journal, Vol.2,794.

    3. W Hawkins, `Reaffirming Freedom of the Seas' (1982) The Freeman, 182.
    4. F Singer, `The Great UN Snorkel' (May 1981) The American Spectator, 24.
    5. J Johnston, `Petroleum Revenue Sharing from Seabed Beyond 200 Miles Offshore'

        (1980) Marine Technology Society Journal vol.14, 28-3

   2.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. The UNCLOS under its Part XI declares the seabed and its resources to be the
        common heritage of mankind as a whole. Consequently, no State or natural or
        juridical person shall, acquire or exercise rights with respect to the minerals
                                                                                                                        89

    recovered from the Area except in accordance with Part XI of the Convention. Read
    article 137 of the UNCLOS.

2. Roles of the International Seabed Authority include but not limited:

i. To protect and conserve the natural resources of the Area
ii. To prevent damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment.
iii. Determination of area for exploration and making the exploration and ascertain

        that the exploration is commercially viable.
iv. To provide Information and data relating to International Seabed Area
v. General administration of the mineral resources of the International Seabed Area

        which is the common heritage of mankind.
vi. Adopt rules, regulations as well as procedures for the conduct of activities in the

        Area.
vii. To promote and encourage marine scientific research in the Area.
                                                                                                                             90

Unit 3: The Concept of Scientific Research and Experiments in the High seas

3.1 Introduction
From our discussions in this course, we found out that the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea provides the legal framework within which all activities in the seas
must be carried out, marine scientific research inclusive. In its Preamble the 1982
Convention recognizes the desirability of establishing a legal order for the oceans and seas
which will among other things promote the study of the marine environment. Part XIII of
the Convention is entirely concerned with the subject of marine scientific research. In fact,
the General Assembly of the United Nations has in several occasions emphasised the
importance of marine science for eradicating poverty, contributing to food security,
conserving the world's marine environment and resources, helping to understand, predict
and accurately respond to natural events and promoting the sustainable development of the
sea environment.

3.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of topic, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Effectively discuss scientific marine research
    ii. Appreciate the need for scientific marine research

3.3 Marine Scientific Research

The Convention did not provide any definite definition of marine scientific research. We
should note however that "survey activities, "prospecting" and "exploration and
exploitation" are primarily dealt with in Parts II, III, XI, Annex III to the Convention, and
in the Agreement relating to the Implementation of Part XI of the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. The Convention contains general guides and principles
for the conduct of marine scientific research under its Article 240. It stipulates that, marine
scientific research shall:

        (a) Be conducted exclusively for peaceful purposes (this is in keeping
            with the general spirit of the Convention to promote the peaceful
            uses of the seas, as provided for in the preamble of the
            Convention and reiterated in its various articles, including arts.
            88, 143 and 301);
                                                                                                                             91

        (b) Be conducted with appropriate scientific methods and means
            compatible with the Convention;

        (c) Not unjustifiably interfere with other legitimate uses of the sea
            compatible with the Convention and shall be duly respected in the
            course of such uses; and

        (d) Be conducted in compliance with all relevant regulations adopted
            in conformity with the Convention including those for the
            protection and preservation of the marine environment.

The concept of marine scientific research prohibits States from using marine scientific
research activities as constituting the legal basis to appropriate or lay any claim to any
portion of the marine environment or its resources (Art. 241 of the UNCLOS). This is in
line with the intent of similar provisions of the Convention regarding the non-appropriation
of the high seas (Arts. 89 and 90 of the UNCLOS) and the Area (Art. 137, paragraphs 1
and 3 of the UNCLOS).

Self-Assessment Exercise

                   Summarily discuss the duties imposed on States and international
                   organizations while conducting marine scientific research

3.3.1 Who can Conduct Scientific Marine Research?

All States, irrespective of their geographical location, and competent international
organizations have the right to conduct marine scientific research, subject to the rights and
duties of other States as provided for in the Convention (Art. 238 of the Convention). The
reference to "all States, irrespective of their geographical location" ensures that not only
coastal States, but also landlocked and other geographically disadvantaged States, have
the right to conduct marine scientific research in the high seas". Article 239 of the
Convention provides that States and competent international organizations shall promote
and facilitate the development and conduct of marine scientific research inaccordance with
this Convention. Freedom of scientific research is expressly referred to in the Convention
as a freedom of the high seas (Art. 87 of the Convention). It should be noted however that
the right to conduct marine scientific research is not an absolute right since it is qualified
                                                                                                                             92

by the rights and duties of other States. Although the term "competent international
organizations" was not defined in the Convention, it can be generally considered to include
inter-governmental organizations which are empowered by their constituting instruments
or other rules to undertake, coordinate, or promote and facilitate the development and
conduct of marine scientific research. Annex VIII to the Convention, particularly Article 2
provides an indicative list of such organizations.

3.4 International co-operation for Scientific Research

It is the requirement of the Convention that there should be cooperation in marine scientific
research between and among States and international organizations permitted to carry out
such activities on the high seas. See generally Articles 242 and 278 of the Convention. In
accordance with the convention, States and competent international organizations should
endeavour to promote international cooperation in marine scientific research for peaceful
purposes in accordance with the principle of respect for sovereignty and jurisdiction and
on the basis of mutual benefit. States are required under this principle to provide, as
appropriate, each other with a reasonable opportunity to obtain from them, or with their
cooperation, information necessary to prevent and control damage to the health and safety
of persons and to the marine environment.

Article 43 stipulates to the effect that `States and competent international organizations are
also required to cooperate through the conclusion of bilateral and multilateral agreements,
to create favourable conditions for the conduct of marine scientific research in the marine
environment and to integrate the efforts of scientists in studying the essence of phenomena
and processes occurring in the marine environment and interrelations between them'. The
Convention also requires that State should promote through competent international
organizations the establishment of general criteria and guidelines to assist in ascertaining
the nature and implications of marine scientific research and to adopt reasonable rules,
regulations and procedures to promote and facilitate marine scientific research beyond their
territorial sea and facilitate, subject to the provisions of their laws and regulations, access
to their harbours and promote assistance for marine scientific research vessels (Arts. 251
and 255 of the Convention)

3.5 Importance of Marine Scientific Research

Knowledge about the seas is still very limited despite the fact that the development of States
particularly those with coastline, often depends on the potential to exploit marine resources.
Marine research is therefore important in the following ways:
                                                                                                                             93

    a. Improvement in the knowledge and understanding of marine and coastal processes,
    b. The improved knowledge is a prerequisite for protecting the marine environment

        and ecosystems in a more precautionary manner and for supporting sustainable
        economic opportunities from sea resources.
    c. `Results from marine scientific research provide input for policy makers in pursuing
        developmental options and also benefit society in terms of weather forecasting and
        prevention of natural disasters'.
    d. Marine scientific research contributes to the improvement in marine technologies
    e. Discoveries from the marine scientific research provide veritable ground for
        improvement on the scientific requirement and skill for the exploitation of the
        seabed resources.

3.6 Summary
Marine scientific research is one aspect of the concept of the freedom of the seas as
articulated by the Convention under its article 87. Every state whether coastal or land-
locked enjoys this right to conduct marine scientific research in the high seas though
subject to certain conditions laid down in the Convention. Marine scientific research is
important for various ocean activities that require some deep skill and scientific knowledge
to undertake. In this unit, we discussed: Marine scientific research and Importance of
marine scientific research in the development of the seabed resources

3.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

Law of the Sea 1996, Bulletin No. 31, pp. 93-95 (United Nations publication).

3.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    i. The UNCLOS requires that there should be cooperation in marine scientific research
        between and among States and international organizations permitted to carry out
        such activities on the high seas. Read articles 242 and 278.

    ii. States and competent international organizations should make efforts to promote
        international cooperation in marine scientific research for peaceful purposes.

    iii. The above should be done in accordance with the principle of respect for
        sovereignty and jurisdiction and on the basis of mutual benefit.

    iv. States are encouraged under the principle to provide, as appropriate, each other
        with a reasonable opportunity to obtain from them, or with their cooperation,
                                                                                                                   94

information necessary to prevent and control damage to the health and safety of
persons and to the marine environment. Read also article 43 of the UNCLOS
                                                                                                                             95

Unit 4: Disposal of Radioactive waste

4.1 Introduction
For several centuries now, the seas have been used as a place to dispose of wastes resulting
from human activities. Considerable amounts of packaged low-level radioactive waste
(LLW) have been dumped at more than 50 sites in the seas particularly the northern part of
the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans. Low-level waste is defined as waste which, due to its low
radionuclide content, does not require shielding during normal handling and transportation
(D. O. Calmet, Ocean disposal of radioactive: Status Report). In 1946, the first sea
dumping operation took place at a site in the North East Pacific Ocean, about 80 kilometers
off the coast of California. The last known dumping operation was in1982, at a site about
550 kilometers off the European continental shelf in the Atlantic Ocean. However, the
possibility of undesirable contamination of the sea from disposal of radioactive wastes has
of recent become a matter of growing international concern.

4.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of the unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Explain the term `radioactive waste'
    ii. Appreciate the position of the law on radioactive disposal in the high seas

4.3 Radioactive Waste
Radioactive waste is a type of hazardous waste that contains radioactive material. It is a
by-product of various nuclear technology processes. Industries generating radioactive
waste include nuclear medicine, nuclear research, nuclear power, manufacturing,
construction, coal and rare-earth mining and nuclear weapons reprocessing. Radioactive
waste is regulated by government agencies in order to protect human health and the
environment.

Self-Assessment Exercise

        1. The high seas are open place, accessible by all and belonging to no nation.
            It is therefore the most appropriate site for disposal of radioactive waste.
            Discuss.

        2. What are the sources and types of radioactive waste?
                                                                                                                             96

4.4 Sources and types of Radioactive Waste

Radioactive waste comes from a number of sources. In countries with nuclear power plants,
nuclear armament, or nuclear fuel treatment plants, the majority of waste comes from the
nuclear fuel cycle and nuclear weapons reprocessing. There other sources which include
medical and industrial wastes, as well as naturally occurring radioactive materials (NORM)
that can be concentrated as a result of the processing or consumption of coal, oil and gas,
and some minerals. Radioactive wastes are of three types namely;

    a. Low-level waste (LLW) which is generated from hospitals and industry, as well as
        the nuclear fuel cycle,

    b. Intermediate-level waste (ILW) contains higher amounts of radioactivity compared
        to low-level waste. It generally requires shielding, but not cooling, and

    c. High-level waste (HLW) which is produced by nuclear reactors and constitutes a
        greater concern to the international community.

4.5 Disposal of Radioactive Waste in the High seas

As wastes from nuclear power plants, government projects, and several other fields of
science continue to stockpile, attention is being drawn on the world's oceans as a
potentially viable sink for these wastes (D. G. Spak, 1986). While other alternatives, such
as burial in deep geological salt formations, are currently being developed, the full
ramifications of these plans remain unknown. The problems presented by radioactive waste
disposal are compounded because much of the radioactive waste currently created will
remain a hazard, not just for a few generations, but for centuries. Whatever options industry
and the international community adopt, such alternatives must be safe for the human
population and the environment.

Some writers still argue that `not enough is known about the possible effects on ocean
ecosystems and our relationship to them to conclude that the ocean is a viable disposal site
for radioactive wastes' (D. G Spak, 1986) pp. 804-805. While those who support the
adoption of disposal of radioactive waste in the sea argue that the sea has large amounts of
naturally occurring radioactivity, they have been unable to answer the central question of
what effect additional man-made radioactive materials will have on the ocean environment.
It is however important to note that radioactive waste would constitute a serious source of
pollution to the marine environment which the present legal regime of the sea seeks to
prevent. The Convention imposes a general obligation on States to protect and preserve the
marine environment and requires States to take individually or jointly all measures
necessary to prevent, reduce, or control pollution using the best practicable means at their
                                                                                                                             97

disposal and in accordance with their capabilities. It defines `pollution to mean `the
introduction by man, directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into the marine
environment, including estuaries, which result in such deleterious effects as harm to living
resources and marine life, hazards to human health, hindrance to marine activities,
including fishing and other legitimate uses of the sea, impairment of quality for use of sea
water and reduction of amenities' (Art.194 UNCLOS). The Convention was created to
regulate all uses of the sea, containing provisions governing all aspects of sea space, such
as delimitation, marine scientific research, economic and commercial activities,
environmental control, transfer of technology, and the settlement of disputes relating to
ocean affairs. In effect however, the Convention did not specifically prohibit or even refer
to the legality of disposing of radioactive waste. Neither did it classify which wastes can
and cannot be disposed of in the seas. It seems the provisions of Article 194 (duty to
prevent, reduce or control pollution) will apply if the proposed activity is determined to be
`pollution'. But from the definition of pollution above, it may be right to argue that
radioactive waste will be considered to be pollution, although this will depend on how it is
stored in the seabed and its likelihood of escape and to cause harm to living marine
resources (R Macrory and R Purdy, 2005).

4.6 Summary

Although the seas are considered by many as potentially viable site for disposal of
radioactive waste, it is not quite certain if that would not constitute `pollution' within the
definition of the term by the Convention. The issue of disposal of radioactive waste in the
seas was not specifically provided for by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea. However, the provision of Article 194 of the Convention seems to be far-reaching to
affect the legality disposal of radioactive waste in the seas. In this unit, we discussed:
Meaning and sources of radioactive waste and disposal of radioactive waste in the seas.

4.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

    1. David G. Spak, `The need for Ban on all Radioactive Disposal in the Ocean',
        (1986) Northwestern Journal on International Law and Business Vol 7, p. 804.

    2. Richard Macrory and Ray Purdy, `Sub Seabed Disposal of Radioactive Waste-Legal
        Considerations', (2005) rwm.nda.gov.uk > publication > nirex-review-of-corw
                                                                                                                             98

4.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

   1. There is a genuine fear that disposal of radioactive waste in the high seas might
        constitute a serious source of pollution to the marine environment within the
        contemplation of the UNCLOS. The UNCLOS under article 194 defines `pollution
        as `the introduction by man, directly or indirectly, of substances or energy into the
        marine environment, including estuaries, which result in such deleterious effects as
        harm to living resources and marine life, hazards to human health, hindrance to
        marine activities, including fishing and other legitimate uses of the sea, impairment
        of quality for use of sea water and reduction of amenities'. Although the Convention
        did not specifically prohibit or even refer to the legality of disposing of radioactive
        waste in the sea, it is proper to argue that the provisions of article 194 which impose
        duty to prevent, reduce or control pollution will apply if radioactive disposal is
        determined to constitute `pollution' which might likely be the case from the above
        definition.

   2. Sources and types of radioactive wastes are:
          i. Low-level waste (LLW) which is generated from hospitals and industry, as
               well as the nuclear fuel cycle,
           ii. Intermediate-level waste (ILW) contains higher amounts of radioactivity
               compared to low-level waste. It generally requires shielding, but not cooling,
               and
           iii. High-level waste (HLW) which is produced by nuclear reactors and
               constitutes a greater concern to the international community.
                                                                                                                             99

Unit 5: Freedom to Submarine Cables & Pipelines, and Mechanical
         Installations

5.1 Introduction

In this unit we intend to explore the rights and duties of States regarding the laying and
operation of the underwater/submarine cables and pipelines. The freedom to lay submarine
cables and pipelines is indeed one of the most venerated high seas freedoms under the 1982
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS). This freedom was
particularly created by Article 87 paragraph 1 (c) of the Convention. There are two main
types of submarine cables:

    a. Communications cables used to transmit data communications, and
    b. Power cables used to transmit electrical power.

Submarine pipelines are used to transport oil and gas resources. All are designed for
underwater use and are laid on or buried under the seabed as allowed by the Convention.

5.2 Learning Outcomes

At the completion of the unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Appreciate the rights and duties of States regarding laying of submarine cables and
        pipelines and other installations

    ii. Understand the freedom in relation to the above

5.3 Freedom of Laying Submarine Cables and Pipelines in the High Seas

Beyond the limits of national jurisdiction in the high seas, every State is entitled to lay
submarine cables and pipeline on the bed of the high seas beyond the continental shelf.
However, in exercising this right, States shall have due regard to cables or pipelines already
in position while the possibilities of repairing existing cables shall not be prejudiced. Article
112 of the Convention provides that, All States are entitled to lay submarine cables and
pipelines on the bed of the high seas beyond the continental shelf.

It should be noted that the Convention also grants the States the freedom to construct
artificial islands and other installations in the high seas. See Article 87 (d) of the
Convention.
                                                                                                                           100

Self-Assessment Exercise

            1. With the aid of the law discuss the obligation of State in the exercise of
                the freedom of laying submarine cables and pipelines in the high sea.

            2. Discuss briefly the position of territorial waters in connection with
                submarine cable and pipelines

5.4 Obligation of States

The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has recognized the
freedom to lay submarine cables and pipeline and perform associated operations.
The Convention also places certain obligations on States regarding the protection of
submarine cables and pipeline and safety of other users.

Pursuant to Article 113 of the Convention `Every State shall adopt the laws and regulations
necessary to provide that the breaking or injury by a ship flying its flag or by a person
subject to its jurisdiction of a submarine cable beneath the high seas done willfully or
through culpable negligence shall be a punishable offence'.

Article 114 requires that `Every State shall adopt the laws and regulations necessary to
provide that, if persons subject to its jurisdiction who are the owners of a submarine cable
or pipeline beneath the high seas, in laying or repairing that cable or pipeline, cause a break
in or injury to another cable or pipeline, they shall bear the cost of the repairs'.

Article 115 provides to the effect that `Every State shall adopt the laws and regulations
necessary to ensure that the owners of ships who can prove that they have sacrificed an
anchor, a net or any other fishing gear, in order to avoid injuring a submarine cable, shall
be indemnified by the owner of the cable or pipeline, provided that the owner of the ship
has taken all reasonable precautionary measures beforehand'.

5.5 Submarine Cables and Pipelines in the Territorial Sea
It is trite already that the territorial sea of each Coastal State falls under the full sovereignty
of the State. Laying of submarine cables and pipelines in territorial waters are therefore
governed by the same legal regime applicable for land cables and pipelines. In other
maritime zones, the provisions of the Law of the Sea Convention regulate the rights of
                                                                                                                           101

laying and operation of submarine cables and pipelines. The Energy Charter Treaty defines
the nature and principles of the energy materials trade and transit. These two Treaties, in
conjunction with national legislation, are sufficient for the successful regulation and
operation of cross-border land and submarine cables and pipelines. The usual case is that
participating States and companies would sign special international treaties and
agreements, defining contractual terms, conditions and the applicable law (Mudric, 2010).

Article 2 of the Convention already provides that the sovereignty of the coastal State
extends to its territorial and archipelagic waters in case of archipelagic State. A permission
and consent of the coastal State must therefore be sought and obtained before laying a
submarine cable or a pipeline in its territorial waters. In granting the consent, the coastal
State may set conditions regarding the track of the cable and its dimensions. What this tend
to explain is that, the laying of the submarine cables and the pipelines in the territorial sea
and archipelagic waters is completely within the regulation of the national law of the
coastal State. Accordingly, the right of "innocent passage" as contemplated by Article
21(1)(c) of the Convention may be restricted in order to protect submarine cables.
However, there is in existence international law and practice that regulates such
undertakings, and/or instructs national regulation on what type of norms to adopt, and
what sort of a legal and political framework to promote (Mudric, 2010).

5.6 Summary

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea provides a number of rules
with regard to laying and operation of the submarine cables and pipelines. The
Convention also defines conditions necessary to be met by States in order to obtain
the right to lay submarine cables and pipelines, and requires Member States to adopt
national legislation that imposes sanctions on those not respecting the rules. In this
unit, we discussed: Freedom of laying submarine cables and pipelines and States rights
and obligations

5.7 References/Further Readings

    1. R Lagoni, "Legal Aspects of High Voltage Direct Current (Hvdc) Cables", (1999)
        LIT Verlag Berlin-Hamburg-Münster

    2. J Crowley, "International Law and Coastal State Control over the Laying of
        Submarine Pipelines on the Continental Shelf ­ The Ekofisk-Emden Gas Pipeline,"
        (1987) 56 Nordic J Int'l L 40

    3. S Kaye, "International Measures to Protect Oil Platforms, Pipelines, and Submarine
        Cables from Attack", 92006-2007) 31 Tul Mar LJ 377, at 398-403
                                                                                                                           102

    4. R Beckman and T Davenport, "Workshop Report ­ Workshop on Submarine Cables
        and Law of the Sea", (2009) Centre for International Law (CIL)

    5. A R Börner, "Private Law Aspects of the Nord Stream Pipeline", (2009) Nord
        Stream Pipeline Conference, CAU Kiel

    6. Miso Mudri, "Rights of States Regarding Underwater Cables and Pipelines",
        (2010) <www.researchgate.net > publication > 265194864_RIGHT>

5.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1. The UNCLOS places certain obligations on States regarding the protection of
    submarine cables and pipeline and safety of other users. For instance,
        i. Article 113 of the UNCLOS `requires States to adopt laws and regulations that
           would punish the offence of willful or negligent breaking or injury by a ship
           flying its flag or by a person subject to its jurisdiction of a submarine cable
           beneath the high seas.
       ii. Article 114 requires that States should adopt laws and regulations to provide that,
           if persons subject to its jurisdiction and are owners of a submarine cable or
           pipeline beneath the high seas, in laying or repairing that cable or pipeline, cause
           a break in or injury to another cable or pipeline, they shall bear the cost of the
           repairs'.

    iii. Article 115 requires that State should adopt laws and regulations to ensure the
            indemnification of owners of ships in case of any injury to the ship by submarine
            cables provided they have taken all necessary precautions.

2. Pursuant to article 2 of the UNCLOS, the territorial sea of each coastal State falls under
    the full sovereignty of the State. Therefore, laying of submarine cables and pipelines in
    territorial waters are governed by the same legal regime applicable for land cables and
    pipelines of the State. Consent of the coastal State must therefore be sought and
    obtained before laying a submarine cable or a pipeline in its territorial waters.
                                                                                                                           103

MODULE 4: JURISDICTION OVER MARITIME ZONE ADJACENT TO
                 THE COAST

Unit 1: The Regime of Ports and Internal Waters

1.1 Introduction

The rights of coastal States to regulate and exploit areas of the ocean within their national
jurisdiction are one of the foundations of the present legal regime of the sea. Jurisdiction
over these maritime zones must however be balanced with the freedom of navigation and
access to resources within the international zone in keeping with the concept of the freedom
of the seas. The Convention permits coastal States to establish several different maritime
zones and exercise various degrees of jurisdictional rights over them. In general, coastal
States can only exercise full sovereignty over the maritime zones near to their coastline
than those zones that are further into the ocean. The jurisdictional nature of various zones
of the sea even to the high seas has been explored earlier. So, we will not go over them
again other than examining the nature of ports and internal waters and the review more the
nature of States Continental Shelf.

It has been generally admitted principle of international law that States have the same
sovereign jurisdiction over their internal waters as they do over their land territory. The
implication of this understanding is that the general rules of international law regarding the
legal order of the seas do not apply to the internal waters of coastal States. Thus, there is
no right of innocent passage through internal waters safe as provided by Article 8
paragraph 2 of the Convention.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of the unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Discuss the rights a coastal has over foreign ships in its ports
    ii. Appreciate the what is the right of access to internal waters

1.3 Internal waters
Pursuant to the relevant provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the
Sea, a country's internal waters are those waters on the side of the baseline of a nation's
territorial waters that is facing toward the land, except in archipelagic states. Internal waters
                                                                                                                           104

therefore include all the waters that fall landward of the baseline from which the territorial
sea and other maritimes zones are measured such as bay, gulf, habour, port, lakes, rivers,
and tidewaters. See Article 8 (1) of the Convention.

Self-Assessment Exercise

              1. Succinctly examine a state jurisdiction over its internal waters
              2. How are internal waters differentiated from territorial sea?
              3. Briefly discuss the jurisdiction of a State over its port

1.4 States Jurisdiction over Internal Waters

In inland or internal waters, sovereign rights of a coastal state are equal to that which it
exercises on their land territory. The coastal state is free to make laws relating to its internal
waters, regulate any use, and use any resource. In the absence of agreements to the contrary,
foreign vessels have no right of passage within internal waters, and this lack of right to
innocent passage is the key difference between internal waters and territorial waters (Art.
2, UNCLOS). The "archipelagic waters" within the outermost islands of archipelagic states
are also treated as internal waters with although in this case, innocent passage must be
allowed. However, the archipelagic state is allowed to designate certain sea lanes in these
waters.

When a foreign vessel is authorized to enter inland waters, it is subject to the domestic laws
of the coastal state but the crew of the ship is subject to the law of the flag state.

1.5 Seaports
A port is a maritime facility usually situated on a sea coast, and which may comprise one
or more wharves where ships may dock to load and discharge passengers and cargo. The
Convention defined port as the outermost permanent harbour works which form an integral
part of the harbour system regarded as forming part of the coast. Off-shore installations
and artificial islands shall not be considered as permanent harbour works. The definition
given above is for the purpose of delimiting the territorial sea (Article 11 of the UNCLOS).

The United Nations Law of the Sea Convention of 1982 creates a new and comprehensive
legal regime of the world's seas. The Convention encompasses nearly every use of the
                                                                                                                           105

oceans resources. The present legal regime of the sea codifies the existing concepts of the
ocean law such as the territorial sea and contiguous zone and in addition creates radically
new maritime zones including the exclusive economic zone, archipelagic waters, and
international straits. Accordingly, the Convention provides detailed articles regarding the
rights and duties of the coastal State, as well as the freedoms and restrictions of ocean-
going vessels in respective maritime zones

However, notwithstanding the innovative provisions by the Convention, it has only
superficially dealt with the issues of navigational rights in inland waters and ports. Apart
from the provision on the right of innocent passage in internal waters, once considered part
of a coastal State's territorial sea, the relevant articles of the Convention provide only
definition of port and internal waters. Article 8 paragraph 1 defines internal waters as
"....waters on the landward side of the baseline of the territorial sea," and ports is defined
as "the outermost permanent harbour works which form an integral part of the harbour
system, regarded as forming part of the coast." The understanding here is that the extent of
the Convention is just to delineate internal waters and ports from the territorial sea.

1.6 Nature of Port State Jurisdiction

What seems to be an accepted norm is that ports are part of a state's territory, and as a
result, that port states have the right to deny entry to foreign vessels. Port states can place
conditions for foreign vessels accessing their ports, can carry out inspections and possibly
institute proceedings against any such vessels suspected to have breached their law.
Foreign-flagged vessels indeed have no right of entry into port (unless specific
international law obligations provide otherwise), and in port they need to comply with port
state law, just like any foreign person needs to comply with the law of the visited territory
(C Ryngaert, and H Ringbom, 2016). Also, because a state exercises territorial sovereignty
over its ports, port states have residual territorial jurisdiction under customary international
law, meaning that international law permits port states to take more stringent measures than
provided in international agreements, unless the agreements specifically prohibits such
additional measures, which is normally not the case (C Ryngaert, and H Ringbom, 2016).
In fact, international agreements have increasingly affirmed the existence of such residual
jurisdiction; notably international agreements on fishing, both binding and non-binding,
have emphasized port states' right to exercise jurisdiction over visiting vessels in rather
explicit terms. See Preamble of the Agreement on Port State Measures to Prevent, Deter
and Eliminate Illegal, Unreported and Unregulated Fishing (Rome, 22 November 2009, in
force 5 June 2016.
                                                                                                                           106

It is logical to argue therefore that the omission of any regime of port or inland water in the
1982 Convention is intentional. Internal waters and port access seem to be two legal
constructs not within the limit and remit of international law of the sea. As noted earlier,
Article 2 of the Convention conveys the sovereignty of a State to encompass both its
territory and its inland waters. Accordingly, therefore, the legal regime for inland waters,
of which ports are part, would logically be governed by national legal regime rather than
international law of the sea. Despite the Convention's apparent omission of inland transit
rights, there is however a great body of international law regarding the scope and right of
port access.

1.7 Summary
Both internal waters and ports are within the territorial sovereignty of coastal States.
Foreign vessels authorized to enter internal waters of a coastal states must in every
ramification endeavour to comply with the law of the coastal state, likewise the port state
which under the customary international law is permitted to exercise certain measure of
jurisdiction over visiting vessels in its port. In this unit, we discussed: Internal waters and

1.8 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

1. Cedric Ryngaert and Henrik Ringbom, `Introduction: State Jurisdiction: Challenges and
Potential' (2016) International Journal of Marine and Coastal Law Vol. 31

2. Tasikas, Vasilios. "The regime of maritime port access: a relook at contemporary
         international and United States law." (2007) Loyola Maritime Law Journal, vol. 7

1.9 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. The sovereign rights of a coastal state over its internal waters are equal to that which
        it assets on its land territory. The coastal state is therefore free to make laws relating
        to its internal waters, regulate any use, and use any resource as it pleases and in the
        absence of agreements to the contrary, foreign vessels have no rights whatsoever in
        internal waters, not even the right of passage.

    2. Just like internal waters, coastal states assert full sovereign right over their territorial
        sea. Read article 2 of the UNCLOS. The only difference between the two is that,
        while foreign vessels under international law has the right of innocent passage in
        the territorial sea, there is no such right in the internal waters.
                                                                                                                      107

3. In customary international law, port situates in the internal waters and so is part of
    a State's territory. Thus Port-States have the right to deny entry to foreign vessels
    or place conditions for foreign vessels accessing their ports, can carry out
    inspections for punishment in case of any breach of the law
                                                                                                                           108

Unit 2: The Regime of the Continental Shelf

2.1 Introduction
The continental shelf has been defined as a geological expression referring to the ledges
that project from the continental landmass into seas and which are covered with only a
relatively shallow layer of water (some 150- 200 meters) and which eventually fall away
into the ocean depths some thousands of meters deep. The ledges or shelves take up some
7 to 8 percent of total area of ocean and their extent varies considerably from place to place.
Continental shelves are known for their rich oil and gas deposits which often make them
host to expensive fishing grounds. This fact however, stimulated a round of appropriations
by coastal States in the years following the Second World War, which gradually altered
the existing legal position/status of the continental shelf from being part of the high sea and
free for exploitation by all States until its current recognition as exclusive to the coastal
States (M N Shaw, 2004) p.521. But there is serious issue with the implementation of
Article 76 of UNCLOS to entitle coastal state claim the resources found in their outer
continental shelves.

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:

   i. Explain the jurisdictional issues with the Continental Shelf
   ii. Appreciate the difficulties associated with the implementation of Article

           76 of the UNCLOS

2.3 Jurisdictional issue with the Continental Shelf

Under the 1982 Convention, the coastal State may exercise sovereign rights over the
continental shelf for the purposes of exploring and exploiting its natural resources. Such
rights are exclusive in that no other State may undertake such activities without prior and
express authorization from the coastal State. See Article 77 of the Convention. It has been
suggested that the sovereign rights recognized as part of the continental shelf regime
specifically relate to natural resources, so that, for example, wrecks lying on the shelf are
not part of the contemplation of the provision (M N Shaw, 2004) p.521. Furthermore, the
rights of coastal State over the continental shelf do not depend on occupation,
effective/notional or any express proclamation. It has been indicated also that the exercise
of the rights by coastal State over the continental shelf shall not infringe on the freedom of
                                                                                                                           109

navigation, or on other rights and freedom of foreign ships as the legal status of the
superjacent waters as part of the High Seas remains unaffected (UNCLOS, Art. 78 (1) &
(2)).

States jurisdiction over their continental shelf is however automatic, but problem arises
with the shelf is of the nature that would entitle the state to a claim over the resources in
the outer continental shelf. In this case, the jurisdiction is not automatic but would require
some complex procedure to come by, a situation which many States detest. See generally
Article 76 of the Convention.

Self-Assessment Exercise

              1. What is continental shelf

              2. For a successful claim to the resources of outer continental shelf, a
                  coastal State has some hurdle to cross. Discuss.

2.4 Outer Continental Shelf

The term outer Continental Shelf refers to all submerged land, its subsoil and seabed that
belong to the United States and are lying seaward and outside the states' jurisdiction, the
latter defined as the "lands beneath navigable waters" in Title 43, Chapter 29, Subchapter
I, Section 1301. See also Article 76 of the Convention.

2.5 Claims to Outer Continental Shelf

While the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea grants coastal States
jurisdiction to extended/outer continental shelf adjacent to their coastlines, the problem lies
on the inability of many states especially developing States to exercise this jurisdiction
owing to the legal, financial and technical hurdle they must pass before successfully
establish their claims to the resources found in their extended continental shelves. Article
76 of the Convention under certain geological conditions gives coastal States right of
claims up to 350 nautical miles the area referred to as the Outer Continental Shelf.
Effectively, Outer Continental Shelf only comes into existence if it is properly claimed by
a Coastal State. The definition of Continental Shelf as offered by Article 76 of the
Convention in itself presents some difficulty, complexity and somewhat contradictory so
                                                                                                                           110

that it further requires a great deal of data and scientific analysis. Coastal States therefore
find it extremely difficult to successfully establish their claim and exercise their jurisdiction
over the resources within the outer continental shelves as a result of the stringent provision
of the relevant article. For a successful implementation of Article 76 of the Convention and
subsequent claim to the outer continental shelf input from coastal States would include:

    i. Elaborate and tortuous legal, scientific and technical capabilities,
    ii. High national research facilities
    iii. Adequate external advice and assistance.

All these will require the availability of experts in various fields and capacity, constant
training and retraining of nationals in the above fields which most coastal States at present
cannot afford. The article therefore requires further review.

2.6 Summary

Although, the Convention grants automatic jurisdiction to coastal over the resources found
in their continental shelf, the stringent requirements for scientific evidence to substantiate
outer continental shelf (OCS) entitlement presents serious hurdles to the States concerned.
Article 76 of the Convention requires States to submit information to the Commission on
the Limits of the Continental Shelf (CLCS) in a costly and complex process which most
States find extremely difficult to comply with. In this unit, we discussed: Jurisdiction over

2.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

M.Sc.E Thesis presented to the Department of Geodesy and Geomatics Engineering,
        University of New Brunswick Canada in October 2002.

1.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. Article 76 of the UNCLOS rather explains continental shelf than define it. Paragraph
        I states that the continental shelf of a coastal State comprises the seabed and subsoil
        of the submarine areas that extend beyond its territorial sea throughout the natural
        prolongation of its land territory to the outer edge of the continental margin, or to
        a distance of 200 nautical miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the
        territorial sea is measured where the outer edge of the continental margin does not
        extend up to that distance. It consists of the submerged prolongation of the land
        mass of the coastal State, and consists of the seabed and subsoil of the shelf, the
                                                                                                                      111

    slope and the rise but does not include the deep ocean floor with its oceanic ridges
    or the subsoil thereof.

2. The right of coastal States over the resources found in the continental shelf is
    automatic. What presents some difficulties is when the State shelf projects beyond
    the normal limits of continental shelf amounting to what is known as outer
    continental shelf. Title over the resources found in this zone is not automatic. Article
    76 of the UNCLOS outlines conditions to be fulfilled for a successful claim. But,
    the implementation of article 76 involves, technical, technological, financial as well
    as legal input which several States, especially developing States cannot afford at
    present.
                                                                                                                           112

Unit 3: Doctrine of Maritime Hot Pursuit and Ship in Distress

3.1 Introduction
In customary international law, the doctrine of maritime hot pursuit recognizes the right of
a coastal state to pursue onto the high seas and seize a visiting/foreign vessel that violated
its laws while within its territorial waters. This right vested on the coastal States to pursue
a vessel and seize it on the high seas constitutes an exception to two fundamental principles
of international law of the sea- first, the concept of the freedom of navigation upon the high
seas, and secondly, the principle that a ship is subject to the exclusive jurisdiction of the
state whose flag it flies. For ships in distress, there is a traditional and recognized right of
access to port for purpose of refuge. However, the recent rise in marine pollution incidents
seems to have jeopardized the traditional right enjoyed by ships in distress. Although
numerous maritime conventions contain provision to this effect, the nature of the right
remains controversial.

3.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, it is expected that you will be able to:

    i. Understand and discuss the doctrine of hot pursuit, and
    ii. Ship in distress and its access to ports

3.3 Basis for the doctrine of Maritime Hot Pursuit

The origin and legitimacy of the doctrine of hot pursuit can be traced to over 100 years of
state practice and can be described as a reflection of customary international law (E J
Molenaar, 2004). Maritime hot pursuit evolved as a customary international law doctrine
(N M Poulantzas, 2002), before being first codified into an international treaty by Article
23 of the 1958 Geneva Convention on the High Seas (the High Seas Convention). The
doctrine of hot pursuit retained its exact meaning under Article 111 of UNCLOS as it had
in the 1958. Hence, the doctrine enjoys "all the sanction of modern State practice and
opinion"(R C Reuland, 1993). The right of hot pursuit as earlier noted is an exception to
exclusive flag state jurisdiction, and the basis for the doctrine is that the high seas should
not be a safe haven for those who attempt to escape the lawful jurisdiction of another state
(R C Reuland, 1993) p. 559. In fact, while supporting the rationale for this doctrine,
Reuland argued in the following words:
                                                                                                                           113

           Limiting a state's enforcement jurisdiction to its marginal seas
           would needlessly foil the state's interest in the enforcement of its
           laws. There is simply no good reason to throw up a barrier to
           pursuit at the line dividing the state's territorial waters from the
           high seas. Pursuit onto the high seas offends the territorial
           sovereignty of no state. Nor does hot pursuit unduly offend the
           principle that ships on the high seas are subject to the exclusive
           jurisdiction of their flag state. Only escaping ships that at one time
           properly fell within a state's territorial jurisdiction are exempted
           from the exclusivity rule.

Under the customary of international law, States are granted the right of hot pursuit. This
right constitutes an exception to the principle of exclusive flag jurisdiction on the high seas.
The doctrine also represents a transgression upon the sovereignty of the flag of a foreign
state as the offending foreign vessel can be pursued even beyond the limits of maritime
zones.

The rationale behind this right as provided by the doctrine of hot pursuit is necessary to
maintain the balance between the principles of free navigation on the high seas and the
interest of the coastal States in the effective governance of their coastal borders
(Poulantzas, 2002). The right given by the doctrine encourages the promotion of public
order by minimizing conflicts. Although the exercise of the right of hot pursuit interferes
with the principle of freedom of navigation, it is only exercised against a vessel which has
violated the laws of the coastal State when there is a reasonable ground to believe that there
has indeed been a violation. In the long term, hot pursuit does not pose any great threat to
the principle of free navigation as it is not often used by the States.

It should be noted however, that the right of hot pursuit ceases once the fleeing vessel enters
the territorial waters of its flag state or those of a third state. In these circumstances,
pursuing a vessel into another state's territorial waters have traditionally been considered
as a violation of that state's sovereignty. Thus, the right of hot pursuit is seen as a pragmatic
balance between the coastal state's interest in enforcing its laws and the interests of the
international community in the freedom of the oceans and the integrity of territorial
jurisdiction (R Walker).

Self-Assessment Exercise
                                                                                                                           114

         1. How is the doctrine of hot pursuit an exception to the principle of
              exclusive jurisdiction of the flag-state?

         2. Discuss the various conditions or principles that guide the exercise of right
              of hot pursuit

         3. The general rule of international law is that ships do not have right to enter
              the port of foreign nations. Discuss

3.4 Conditions for the Exercise of the Right of Hot Pursuit

Some conditions should be fulfilled in accordance with the norms of international law to
be able to justify hot pursuit. One of the basic requirements is that the pursuit should be
immediate. The phrase implies that the pursuit should be commenced as soon as possible
after the offence is committed by the foreign vessel (Baird, 2002). Article 111 of the
Convention also lays down certain conditions which should be fulfilled for the exercise the
right to be justified. These conditions are discussed below:

   i. Good Reason
        The State which is exercising its right under the doctrine of hot pursuit
        must have reasonable ground to believe that the foreign vessel has
        transgressed the law of the State. The leading guideline contained in the
        UNCLOS is the requirement that there should be a good reason to believe
        that the foreign vessel violated the law and regulation of the state within
        its territorial waters. The phrase `good reason' suggests that there should
        be more than a mere suspicion that an offence has been committed by the
        vessel. The reason should be based on a strong sign or indication. The right
        of hot pursuit is limited not only to a committed offence. The right can
        also be exercised in the case of attempted offence by a foreign vessel.

   ii. Pursuit must commence within the maritime Jurisdiction of the
        pursuing State

        A foreign vessel may be pursued when it commits any wrong either
        physically or constructively while it is under the jurisdiction of the law
        enforcing state. The issue is that the pursuit must commence when the
        foreign vessel is still within the internal waters, territorial sea, archipelagic
        waters, contiguous zone or Exclusive Economic Zone of the pursuing
        State.
                                                                                                                      115

iii. Signal to Stop

    The pursuit can be commenced only after the foreign vessel has been given
    an auditory or visual signal to stop, which has been heard or seen by the
    foreign vessel. The requirement here is that the order or signal to stop must
    be auditory or visual and it must be given from such a distance that the
    foreign vessel is able to hear or see the signal given by the enforcement
    vessel. Giving a signal to stop through a radio broadcast can be confusing.
    That was why when the 1958 Convention was drafted, it excluded radio
    signal. The reason for excluding radio signal was that there may be no
    limit on the distance from which a radio signal may be given (Tasikas,
    2004).

iv. Authorised Vessel

    The right of hot pursuit can be exercised only by authorized government
    vessels or warships which are identifiable and clearly marked. In addition,
    such vessels should be under the service of the government. It means that
    enforcement vessels, naval submarines, coast guard vessels and ministry
    or defense or military vessels can exercise the right of hot pursuit. If the
    government especially authorizes any other vessel or aircraft to enforce
    law and order of the State, they can also exercise the right of hot pursuit
    provided that they are clearly marked as being under government service.

v. Continuous and uninterrupted Pursuit

    The law requires that there should be no interruption during the course of
    the pursuit. That is to say, the pursuit must be continuous. The law requires
    that that the first vessel or craft should continue pursuing the foreign vessel
    until some other vessel or craft which has been sent for by the coastal
    authorities or has been summoned by the pursuing vessel arrives at the
    spot and continue the pursue. There may be some reasons for interruptions.
    For example, where the pursuing vessel develops some mechanical or
    technical failure it may be compelled to discontinue the hot pursuit, or due
    to any natural causes like darkness or bad climatic and weather conditions
    the pursuing vessel is forced to give up the chase or for any other reason
    like stopping to study evidence left by the fleeing vessel or arrest any other
    small boats which are accompanying the foreign vessel.
                                                                                                                           116

   vi. Termination of Hot Pursuit

        The right to pursue terminates immediately the offending vessel enters the
        territorial sea of its own jurisdiction or any third State. A hot pursuit also
        terminates when it is abandoned or is interrupted. This restriction is
        important due to the fundamental rule of the sovereignty of the other state.
        Under the Convention on the Law of Sea and High Seas, the hot pursuit
        must not be resumed when the fleeing vessel enters its own territorial
        jurisdiction or the territorial jurisdiction of a third state and subsequently
        returns to the high seas. a times foreign vessels take advantage of this
        provisions to used it intentionally to evade arrest during hot pursuit.

3.5 Ships in Distress

The right of access to ships in distress in ports has been long recognized in customary
international law. This right has been explicitly recognized in respect of preservation of
human life and is exercised in accordance with Articles 18(2), 39(1) (c) and 98 of the
Convention. However, there is as yet no legal consensus as regards its conflict with the
interests of the coastal State. The debate on the right of ships in distress to enter a port of
refuge or the right of a coastal State to refuse entry is of great importance in both public
and private maritime law. Under customary international law, there exists no right of entry
into ports for foreign ships unless there is a treaty conferring such right to the ships of the
flag state concerned (A. V. Lowe, 1977). The right of a foreign ship in distress to seek
refuge in port is not explicitly governed by any international regime, including the
UNCLOS. Therefore, the customary right of ships in distress to enter any port or place of
refuge constitutes an exception to this general rule. This customary right has not been
codified in any international convention but has been widely acknowledged and defended
especially by maritime States. According to this exception, ships are entitled to certain
"humanitarian considerations and jurisdictional exemptions when they are forced into a
foreign jurisdiction as a result of force majeure" (A. Chircop, 2002).

Although the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has no explicit provisions
regarding the right of ships in distress to enter any port, the Convention has several
provisions that implied this right. They include the provisions on:

    a. the duty to render assistance to persons at sea (Art. 98).
    b. the privileges and immunities granted to foreign ships in case of force majeure
    c. the exercise of the authority by coastal or port States over foreign ships conditional

        upon the fact that the ships must have entered their waters voluntarily
                                                                                                                           117

    d. passage in the territorial sea includes stopping and anchoring when they are
        rendered necessary by force majeure or distress (Art. 8 UNCLOS).

The foregoing shows the fact that distress or force majeure validly constitute an exception
to the absence of a right of entry into ports. Thus, the recognition of the right of access by
a ship in distress to port is not in question. What is in question, however, is the absolute or
conditional nature of this right.

3.6 Summary

The customary international law principle is that a ship in distress can seek refuge in any
port as a safe haven. This is just an exception to the general rule that ships do not have
automatic and absolute the right of entry to port of other State under normal circumstances.
In this unit, we discussed: The right of hot pursuit as an exception to the principle of the
freedom of the seas and that of the exclusive jurisdiction of the flag-state and the conditions
for the exercise of this right and right of access to port by ship in distress as exception the
general international law rule that ships do not have right of entry to foreign ports except
on agreed treaty.

3.7 References/Further Readings/Web Resources

1. Erik Jaap Molenaar, "Multilateral Hot Pursuit and Illegal Fishing in the Southern
        Ocean: The Pursuits of the Warsa I and the South Toni" (2004) 19 IJMCL 19 at 26.

2. A. Chircop, `Ships in Distress, Environmental Threats to Coastal States, a Place of
        Refuge: New Directions for an Ancien Regime? (2002) 33 ODIL 207, 212.

3. United States v. Mexico (Rebecca case), (1929) 33 AJIL 860, ECJ Case C-286/90,
        Poulsen (1992) ECR I-6019, para. 35.

4. A.V. Lowe, `The Right of Entry into Maritime Ports in International Law', (1977)
        14 San Diego Law Review 597.

5. A. Chircop, O. Linden and D. Nielsen, `Characterising the Problem of Places of
        Refuge for Ships', in: A. Chirop and O. Linden, Places of Refuge for Ships:
        Emerging Environmental Concerns of a Maritime Custom, (Martinus Nijhoff ­
        Leiden, 2006) pp 9-11.

6. R Walker, `International Law of the Sea: Applying the Doctrine of Hot Pursuit in
        the 21st Century' available at<www.nzlii.org > journals > AukULawRw > 9.pdf>.
                                                                                                                           118

7. Robert C Reuland "The Customary Right of Hot Pursuit onto the High Seas:
        Annotations to Article 111 of the Law of the Sea Convention" (1993) 33 Va J Intl
        L 557 at 557.

8. Nicholas M Poulantzas the Right of Hot Pursuit in International Law (2nd ed,
        Martinus Nijhoff, The Hague, 2002) at 39;

9. D P O'Connell, The International Law of the Sea (Oxford University Press, Oxford,
        1982-1984) vol2 at 1076.

3.8 Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

1. The right of hot pursuit is an exception to exclusive flag state jurisdiction. The rationale
    behind this doctrine is that the high seas should not serve as a safe haven for those who
    attempt to escape the lawful jurisdiction of another State. The doctrine is an exception
    to the principle of exclusive jurisdiction of the flag-state because it transgresses upon
    the sovereignty of foreign state as the offending foreign vessel can be pursued even
    beyond the limits of maritime zones into the high sea.

2. The exercise of the right of hot pursuit is guided by series of principles and conditions
     in accordance with the norm of international law:

        i. Good reason: Pursuing State must have reasonable ground to believe that the
                             foreign vessel has transgressed its law.

        ii. Immediate: The pursuit should be commenced as soon as possible after the
                               offence is committed.

        iii. Maritime Jurisdiction: The pursuit must commence within any of the maritime
                               zones of the enforcing State.

        iv. Signal to stop: The pursuit can be commenced only after the foreign vessel has
                               been given an auditory or visual signal to stop which it has heard
                               or seen.

        v. Type of vessels: The right of hot pursuit can be exercised only by authorized
                               government vessels or warships which are clearly marked as
                               such.

        vi. Continuity: The pursuit must be continuous and uninterrupted. Read Article
                               111of the UNCLOS

3. Under customary international law, there is no right of entry into ports for foreign
   ships unless there is a treaty conferring such right to the ships of the flag state
   concerned (A. V. Lowe, 1977). The right of a foreign ship in distress to seek refuge in
                                                                                                                        119

port is not explicitly governed by any international regime, including the UNCLOS
although such customary right may under state practice constitute an exception to the
general rule.
                                                                                                                           120

MODULE 5: THE REGIME OF THE HIGH SEAS

Introduction

The primary legal regime of the seas is the Convention on the High Seas which is an
international treaty that codifies the rules of international law relating to the high seas,
otherwise referred to as international waters. The Convention was one of four treaties
created at the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS I). The four
treaties were signed on 29 April 1958 and entered into force on 30 September 1962. The
Convention on the High Seas has been replaced by the 1982 United Nations Convention
on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS III), which introduced several new concepts to the law
of maritime boundaries with specific provisions.

Unit 1: The Commonage Concept of the High Seas and Seabed

1.1 Introduction

By "high seas", Article 1 of the Convention on the High Seas means, all parts of the sea
those are not included in the territorial sea or in the internal waters of a State. The history
of the law of the sea characterises a constant struggle between states that asserted special
rights to vast areas of the sea and other states that insisted on the freedom to navigate and
fish in all the ocean spaces. Today, the high seas and the seabed are open for exploration
and use by all states subject to the provisions of the present legal regime of the sea to that
effect.

The common heritage of mankind is a general concept of international law which
establishes that some localities belong to all humanity and that their resources are available
for everyone's use and benefit, taking into special account future generations and the needs
of developing countries. It is a principle of international law that states that certain defined
territorial areas and elements of humanity's common heritage should be held in trust for
future generations and be protected from exploitation by individual states or corporations.
The 1967 World Peace through Law Conference referred to the high seas as "the common
heritage of mankind" and stated that the seabed should be subject to United Nations' control
and jurisdiction. It is intended to achieve aspects of the sustainable development of
common spaces and their resources.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:
                                                                                                                           121

    i. Have a good grip of the concept of common heritage of mankind as it relates to the
        seabed and its resources

    ii. The legal status of the Area and its resources, and
    iii. The international legal framework for the activities therein.

1.3 Deep Seabed of the High Seas, as Common Heritage of Mankind
The concept of the common heritage of mankind affirms that the natural resources of
certain region such as the deep seabed and of outer space are held in common by all nations,
and should be exploited and distributed equitably for the benefit of mankind. In 1970,
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 2749, the Declaration of Principles
Governing the Seabed and Ocean Floor, was adopted by 108 states which held that the
deep seabed should be preserved for peaceful purposes and is the Common Heritage of
Mankind. Meanwhile, the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS)
under its Article 136 on the Common Heritage of Mankind concept was stated to relate to
"the seabed and ocean floor and subsoil thereof, beyond the limits of national jurisdiction".

Self-Assessment Exercise

             1. Enumerate the reasons for which the Authority is required to adopt
                 appropriate rules, regulations and procedures with regard to
                 activities in the Area

              2. Briefly discuss the legal status of the Area
             3. Explain the term Due Diligence as espoused by the Seabed

                 Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of
                 the Sea

1.3.1 Legal Status of the Seabed (Area) and its Resources

As a way of radical departure from the tradition of open access and freedom of the high
seas, the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) under its
Article 136 declared the seabed area beyond the limit of national jurisdiction (the Area)
and its mineral resources as the common heritage of mankind. According to the above
article, the Area and its resources are the common heritage of mankind. The implication
of this declaration is that the Area must be controlled and administered by the International
Seabed Authority (the Authority) for the benefit of mankind as a whole. All mineral
exploration and exploitation activities within the zone must therefore be sponsored by a
                                                                                                                           122

State Party to UNCLOS and approved by the Authority. The Authority has adopted and
approved regulations and guidance for exploration activities in the Area and in 2013
commenced the development of regulations to govern the future exploitation of seabed
minerals, using polymetallic nodules to test run the new venture.

1.4 International Legal Framework for Activities in the Seabed

United Nations Convention on Law of the Sea under Part XI, in conjunction with its 1994
Implementation Agreement relating to Part XI, defines the legal status of the seabed and
sets forth the international legal framework for activities regarding the deep seabed mining
and marine scientific research within the Area. The guiding principle of the common
heritage of mankind clearly manifests in several ways such as the following:

   a. all rights in the resources of the Area are conferred on humankind as a whole, on
        whose behalf the Authority shall act,

   b. no State or natural or juridical persons can claim, acquire or exercise rights with
        respect to resources in the Area except in accordance with Part XI,

   c. all mining and any minerals recovered may only be alienated in accordance with
        UNCLOS and the rules adopted by the Authority,

   d. States are enjoined to ensure that they exercise "effective control" over any
        activities by their state enterprises and other natural or juridical persons they
        sponsor,

   e. activities in the Area, including marine scientific research, are to be conducted for
        the benefit of mankind as a whole, and

   f. financial and other economic benefits from seabed mining are subject to equitable
        sharing under rules to be developed by the Authority. See generally, UNCLOS
        articles 137-143.

It is the requirement of the Convention that necessary measures should be taken to ensure
effective protection for the marine environment from harmful effects which may arise from
mining-related activities. The Authority shall therefore adopt appropriate rules, regulations
and procedures for the following purposes among others for:

   a. the reduction, prevention and control of pollution and other hazards to the marine
        environment, and

   b. the protection and conservation of the natural resources of the seabed and the
        prevention of damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment (Art. 45
        UNCLOS). It is also the requirement of the Convention in Part XII that national
                                                                                                                           123

        rules for pollution from seabed activities in the Area and those within national
        jurisdiction should not be less effective than international rules, standards and
        recommended practices and procedures (Arts. 208-209 UNCLOS). The law
        provides furthermore that all States share a common obligation to protect and
        preserve the marine environment, including rare or fragile ecosystems as well as the
        habitat of depleted, threatened or endangered species and other forms of marine life
        (Arts. 192 & 194.5 UNCLOS).

1.5 The Obligations and Responsibilities of sponsoring States

In a special advisory opinion of the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal
for the Law of the Sea in 2011, the legal requirements of States sponsoring mining entities
under the Convention were elaborately explained. The Chamber advised that sponsoring
States were expected to exercise a high degree of "due diligence" to ensure that an entity
they sponsor whether natural or juridical persons complied with the relevant provisions of
the Convention and the regulations adopted by the Authority.

While interpreting what is meant by "due diligence", the Chamber determined that a State
has the obligation to adopt and enforce laws, regulations and administrative measures at all
times that it is acting as a sponsor of an entity. Such measures must be at least as stern as
those adopted by the Authority and no less effective than any other relevant international
rules, regulations and procedures for environmental protection. Such rules and standards
must give effect to following:

   a. the precautionary approach based on Principle 15 of the Rio Declaration, requiring
        actions where scientific evidence is insufficient but "where there are plausible
        indications of potential risk",

   b. best environmental practice,
   c. technical and financial guarantees by a contractor,
   d. provision should be made for recourse for compensation, and
   e. conduct of an environmental impact assessment.

To circumvent the possibility of the rise of "sponsoring States of convenience" with
varying regulatory requirements, the Chamber determined that the due diligence obligation
was the same for both developed and developing countries.
                                                                                                                           124

1.6 Summary

The principle of the common heritage of mankind over the seabed of the high seas became
imperative due to the growing concern among the international community regarding the
problems of jurisdictional control over the ocean floor and its resources. Further to the
traditional conflicts over fishing rights on the seas, the advancement in technology has
created additional problem regarding the exploitation of the mineral resources of the
seabed. The adoption of the commonage principle was therefore to assuage the fear of
developing States that advance nations would soon expose the seabed and its resources to
competitive national appropriation and use. In this unit, we discussed: Concept of common
heritage of mankind as it relates to the seabed and Legal Status of the seabed and
international framework governing the activities therein.

1.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

    1. Noyes E., "The common heritage of mankind: past, present and future," (2012)
        Denv. J. Intl'L L. & Pol'Y, 457.

    2. Wolfrum R. The common heritage of mankind. Max Planck Encyclopedia of Public
        International Law, para. 25.

    3. Scovazzi T. "Is the UN convention on the law of the sea the legal framework for all
        activities in the sea? The case of bio prospecting in Vida D eds", (2010) Law,
        Technology and Science for oceans in globalization, 313

    4. Rio Declaration Principle 8; UN. Doc. A/CONF.151/26, 14 June 1992.

    5. Tuerk, Helmut. 2010. The idea of common heritage of mankind. In Norman A.
        Martínez Gutiérrez Ed. Serving the Rule of International Maritime Law: Essays in
        Honour of Professor David Joseph Attard, 157­175. Oxford shire, U. K. Routledge

    6. Pardo, Arvid,. The Common Heritage: Selected Papers on Oceans and World Order
        1967­1974. Malta, (Malta University Press, 1975)

    7. Baslar, Kemal, The Concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind in International
        Law, (The Hague, The Netherlands. Kluwer Law International, 1997).

1.7Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise

1. The Authority adopts rules, regulations and procedures in relation to the Area in order
     to:

        i. reduces, prevent and control of pollution in the marine environment
        ii. protect and conserve the natural resources of the seabed
                                                                                                                      125

    iii. prevent damage to the flora and fauna of the marine environment. Read article
        45 of the UNCLOS.

2. Pursuant to article 136 of the UNCLOS, the seabed area is beyond the limit of
   national jurisdiction and its mineral resources are declared the common heritage of
   mankind. The implication of the declaration is that the Area must be controlled and
   administered by the International Seabed Authority (the Authority) for the benefit of
   mankind as a whole

3. The term Due Diligence as used in this context depicts a situation by which a State
    has the obligation to adopt and enforce laws, regulations and administrative
    measures at all times that it is acting as a sponsor of an entity. Such measures must
    also be at least as stern as those adopted by the Authority and no less effective than
    any other relevant international rules, regulations and procedures for environmental
    protection.
                                                                                                                           126

Unit 2: Fishing Rights and Pollution Regulations

2.1 Introduction
In customary international law, living resources of the areas beyond the limit of national
jurisdiction have been traditionally regarded as common property or common resources.
The doctrine of common resources states that no State can have exclusive rights over them,
or the right to prevent others from joining in their exploitation (Christy and Scott, 1992).
The freedoms of the high seas, and the attendant freedom to fish, well recognized in
international customary law, is a consequence of the doctrine of the common property
applied to fisheries resources in the area beyond national jurisdiction (M. C. Engler, 2007).

2.2 Learning Outcomes
At the completion of this unit, you are expected to be able to:

    i. Explain the rights of States to fish in the high seas
    ii. Explain how pollution/environmental impact by fishing activities are regulated.

2.3 Fishing rights in the high seas

The freedom of the high seas is one of the notable principles of the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea as set out under Article 87. However, it is very important
to note that this freedom is a limited one and so is not absolute. The Convention provides
that, the high seas are open to all States, whether coastal or land-locked. Freedom of the
high seas is exercised under the conditions laid down by this Convention and by other rules
of international law. It comprises, inter alia, both for coastal and land-locked States. This
freedom comprises among others, the freedom of fishing, subject to the conditions laid
down in section 2 of the Convention. Unlike maritime zones under full sovereignty of the
coastal States, the UNCLOS imposes specific conservation and utilisation obligations on
States respecting conservation, utilisation and enforcement in their exclusive economic
zones and on the high seas (M Tsamenyi and Q Hanich, 2012). Article 116 of UNCLOS
provides that All States have the right for their nationals to engage in fishing on the high
seas subject to:

          (a) their treaty obligations;
          (b) the rights and duties as well as the interests of coastal States

               provided for, inter alia, in article 63, paragraph 2, and
               articles 64 to 67; and
          (c) the provisions of this section
                                                                                                                           127

Having learnt much of the rights that States have to fish on the high seas and the attendant
duties and obligation, we do not intend to delve deep into the discourse here. Our objective
is to see how this and the fishing activities impact marine environment and the way they
are regulated.

Self-Assessment Exercise

               1. Briefly discuss fishing rights in the high seas

               2. Pollution is one way by which fishing activities can impact marine
                   environment. In concise form, discuss the legal provisions towards
                   checking this problem

2.4 Pollution/Environmental Impacts of Fishing on the High Seas and their
Regulations

Fishing activities can impact on the marine environment. This may occur in several ways
including pollution from fish processing plants which can lead to the alteration of marine
habitat. Fisheries deeply modify the trophic chain and the flows of biomass and energy
across the ecosystem. They can also alter habitats, especially by destroying and disturbing
bottom topography and the associated habitats. Fishing gear can affect the living and non-
living environment within which the target and other related resources live. Environmental
damage can also result from the very nature of the fishing technology such as the use of
dynamite or poison or from the inappropriate use of an otherwise acceptable gear like using
trawls in coral reefs or sea grass beds.

The 1982United Nations Convention on the Law of the Seas imposes an obligation on
States to ensure that efforts are made towards the conservation of the marine environment
in every fishing process. Article 117 states that All States have the duty to take, or to
cooperate with other States in taking, such measures for their respective nationals as may
be necessary for the conservation of the living resources of the high seas. These must
include the measure to minimise and prevent marine pollution resulting from oil and
garbage pollution from fishing vessels. The States therefore have a responsibility not to
pollute the sea, and take into due cognizance the laws about oil and garbage pollution from
vessels, including fishing vessels. Pollution of the marine environment by ships, including
fishing vessels, is strictly controlled by the International Convention for the Prevention of
Pollution from Ships (MARPOL Convention) 1973. See Annex IV Prevention of Pollution
                                                                                                                           128

by Sewage from Ships (entered into force 27 September 2003) which "Contains
requirements to control pollution of the sea by sewage; the discharge of sewage into the
sea is prohibited, except when the ship has in operation an approved sewage treatment plant
or when the ship is discharging comminuted and disinfected sewage using an approved
system at a distance of more than three nautical miles from the nearest land; sewage which
is not comminuted or disinfected has to be discharged at a distance of more than 12 nautical
miles from the nearest land".

Therefore, under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, particularly in
Article116, States are under obligation to make provision for the protection and
conservation of marine resources and the marine environment in every maritime zone
within their jurisdiction and subject to their regulations as well in the high seas. Thus, while
UNCLOS expressly recognises the right of nationals of States to fish in the high seas it
also places states under an obligation to adopt living resource conservation measures based
on the best scientific research available to states as prescribed by UNCLOS (Art. 119) in
respect of their nationals engaging in fishing or harvesting activities in the high seas (Art.
117).

Article 1of the Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the
High seas, 1958 affirms that all the States had the duty to adopt or co-operate with other
States in adopting such measures as may be necessary for the conservation of the living
resources of the high seas. In addition, there have been other agreements concerning the
environmental protection of the high seas such as the International Convention relating to
Intervention on the High Seas in cases of Oil Pollution Casualties, 1969 effective from
1975(M. N. Shaw, 2004) p.553-554.

2.5 Types of sea pollution

i. Garbage

Garbage and plastic debris (bags, straws, cutlery, six-pack rings, water bottles, etc.) is a
huge threat to the survival of marine fauna. Trash is ingested, causes entanglement, and
suffocates our ocean friends.
                                                                                                                           129

ii. Sunscreen and Other Topicals

Sunscreen, body lotion, insect repellents, essential oils, hair products, and makeup can all
make their way into the water via the bodies of swimmers. These substances negatively
affect algae, sea urchins, fish, and mammals in the ocean as well as coral reefs.

iii. Oil Seepage

While oil seepage from highly pressurized seafloor rock does occur naturally in some areas
around the world, there are plenty of other ways humans are adding to the problem. Oil
from vehicles on the road wash off and trickle into the ocean. Boats sometimes spill oil
directly into the water. Of course, there are also occasional catastrophic oil spills. No matter
how the oil seeps, it's harmful to marine life.

iv. Sewage

Sometimes our sewer and septic systems don't operate properly or do not remove enough
nitrogen and phosphorus before discharging our gray water into the waterways. The EPA
estimates that 10-20% of septic systems fail at some point in their operational lifetimes.
This can happen due to aging infrastructure, inappropriate design, overloaded systems, and
poor maintenance. The resulting pollution comes from soaps and detergents, human
wastewater, and solid sludge.

v. Agricultural and Aquaculture Runoff

Nitrogen-rich fertilizers and pesticides applied by inland farmers run off into the ocean
through rivers after a rainstorm. Also, the aquaculture industry has been known to release
uneaten food, antibiotics, and parasites from fish farms into nearby waters.
                                                                                                                           130

vi. Industrial Waste

Industrial waste is a huge issue when it comes to ocean dumping. Dangerous toxins that
accumulate include radioactive waste, arsenic, lead, fluoride, cyanide, and many other high
contaminants. This waste infects the water and sea life...including the ones that we humans
eat.

2.6 Prevention/Reduction of marine pollution

The Oceans are massive, pulsing, vibrant bodies of water that serve humanity in countless
ways from providing food to enabling commerce to simply being beautiful. But these
powerful expanses of sea are not invincible. Each year, human activity erodes marine life
in some way, essentially polluting the oceans. It becomes complicated to ignore the gravity
of ocean pollution, even for the most skeptical! By simply changing a few habits in your
daily life, you can make a difference it helps reduce plastic waste more than you think.
Here are some solutions to reduce the Ocean pollution

i. Refuse disposable utensils: Straws, cutlery, tumblers and plastic bags

Plastic forks, knives and spoons may be convenient, but they're wreaking havoc on our
oceans. In fact, six million tons of non-durable plastics are discarded every year. "Non-
durable" means that the plastic has a useful life of less than three years. Other examples of
non-durable plastics include plastic packaging, trash bags, cups, and more.

Plastic bottles are present in very (very) large quantities in our oceans, they are ingested by
marine mammals or accumulate in nature and on our beaches. Different kinds of plastic
can degrade at different times, but the average time for a plastic bottle to
completely degrade is at least 450 years. It can even take some bottles 1000 years
to biodegrade. The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is a colossal floating mass of
plastic that currently measures three times the size of France.

ii. Recycle Properly

Recycling is an important factor in conserving natural resources and greatly contributes
towards improving the environment. Below are some helpful hints about recycling in and
around the home.
                                                                                                                           131

iii. Reduce energy use

Drastic reductions will help reduce Oceans' temperatures. Current increases in
temperatures are threatening marine life and starving it with scarce levels of oxygen.
Carbon dioxide from burning fossil fuels is making our oceans more acidic. One
consequence could be the loss of corals on a global scale, as their calcium skeletons are
weakened by the increasing acidity of the water. There are many simple ways you can
reduce your energy use.

2.7 Summary
Under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 States have the right to
fish on the high seas and every state retains the competence make laws for their ships
although certain minimum standard are imposed on them. Fishing activities have some
level of marine impact including pollution, hence the need for the regulation of fisheries in
the marine zone especially the high seas. In this unit, we discussed: Rights to fish on the
high seas and Environmental impact of fishing on the seas and their regulations.

2.8 References/Further Readings/Web Resources
    1. Martin Tsamenyi and Quentin Hanich, Fisheries Jurisdiction under the Law of the
        Sea Convention: Rights and Obligations in Maritime Zones under the Sovereignty
        of Coastal States, (University of Wollongong, 2012).
    2. M.N. Shaw, International Law, 5th edn (Cambridge: University of Cambridge Press,
        2004) pp. 49-571.

    3. Christy and Scott, The Commonwealth in Ocean Fisheries (2nd ed., Baltimore,
        1972), ch. 2, as cited by Birnie and Boyle, International Law and the Environment
        (Oxford, 1992).

    4. M Cecilia Engler, Establishment and Implementation of a Conservation and
        Management for the High Seas Fisheries, with focus on the Southeast Pacific and
        Chile, (2007) at www.un.org > los > fellows_papers > engler_0607_chile.

2.9. Possible Answer to Self-Assessment Exercise

    1. The freedom of the high seas is widely provided for under article 87 of the
        UNCLOS and this includes the right to free fishing in the high sea. The fishing right
        is however made subject to the conditions laid down in section 2 of the UNCLOS.
                                                                                                                      132

    Article 116 of UNCLOS specifically empowers and grants all States the right for
    their nationals to engage in fishing on the high seas although subject to certain
    conditions specified therein. The deduction here is that the freedom to fish in the
    high sea, like all other rights outlined in article 87 of the UNCLOS is not an absolute
    one.

2. Fishing activities can result in pollution and negatively impact the marine
    environment. The UNCLOS therefore charges States to ensure that efforts are made
    towards the conservation of the marine environment in every fishing process. Read
    article 117 of the UNCLOS. While recognising the right of nationals of States to
    fish in the high seas UNCLOS places states under an obligation to adopt living
    resource conservation measures based on the best scientific research available to
    them. See article 119 of UNCLOS. Pollution of the marine environment by ships,
    including fishing vessels, is also strictly controlled by the International Convention
    for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL Convention) 1973 under
    Annex IV
