PROGRAMME: LL.M
COURSE CODE: JIL 819
COURSE TITLE: INTERNATIONAL MARITIME LAW 1
COURSEWRITER/DEVELOPER: DR MARTINS N. ISHAYA, NOUN,
ABUJA
COURSE EDITOR: PROF A O EKPU
AMBROSE ALI UNIVERSITY, EKPOMA

FIRST SEMESTER

Department of Jurisprudence and International Law,
National Open University of Nigeria, ABUJA

INTRODUCTION
National Open University of Nigeria, Abuja, runs LLM in International Maritime Law and is
taught in the Department of Jurisprudence and International Law by renowned experts in the area
of International Law, International Maritime Law and International Law of the Sea. You will gain
knowledge and practical skills required to advise, litigate and negotiate, based on relevant legal
frameworks such as international trade law and environmental law and the rules of admiralty. The
wide range of options includes key modules that provide the essential know-how for a career in
the maritime industry, such as Carriage of Goods by Sea, Marine Insurance, Admiralty Law and
International Trade Law. Maritime law is a complex and fascinating special area that opens up a
broad range of career options. Whichever path you choose, our diverse student community and
extensive industry connections will enable you to build a global network of contacts that will be
invaluable for your future in the maritime industry.

                                                               1
The LLM Maritime Law programme develops your practical legal skills required to advise, litigate
and negotiate, within a module structure that allows you to shape your degree towards your
particular interests. The LLM Maritime Law draws on the research strengths of the department of
academic staff who are active at the cutting edge of international and national legal reform and
development. In the Department of Jurisprudence and International of Law we are strongly
committed to providing the very best learning experience for all our students in a friendly,
stimulating and research-led environment. This challenging and prestigious degree attracts
talented students from around the world for those who already have legal training.

Note that Maritime law regulates activities that take place on the sea. Many countries have their
own laws which govern maritime activities within their borders, but there are also various treaties
and conventions which provide a framework for international maritime laws. Students pursuing an
LL.M. program in Maritime or Admiralty Law will be exposed to a number of issues important in
the field, including regulation of shipping, marine insurance, and international trade Law. And
increasingly, LL.M. programs in Maritime Law are also exploring related topics, such as marine
pollution and climate change. An LL.M. in Maritime Law can prepare grads for a variety of jobs,
including maritime specialists in private law firms, legal analysts at maritime insurance firms, or
positions at international bodies.

This LLM provides an advanced understanding of a specialist area of maritime law and enables
practitioners in both the legal field and maritime industry to enhance their career prospects. It
improves students' research and independent study skills as well as the ability to develop
substantiated critical argument. It is open to students who have successfully completed an LLB
degree. International Maritime Law Program brings together a global network of accomplished
professionals from a broad range of legal practices, industries, and businesses. The programme is
unique blended learning format combines theory and practical with online instruction, offering a
level of flexibility that's ideal for busy Legal practitioners who seek advanced expertise in
International Maritime Law.

COURSE LEARNING OUTCOMES

You will learn the key doctrines of international Maritime Law and practice from the Department
of Jurisprudence and International Law taught by members of academic staff of the department of

                                                               2
the Faculty of Law, while you expand your international connections. Such concepts of
International Law are:

         i. The concept of International Maritime Law
         ii. Delimitation of various maritime Zones
         iii. The doctrine of hot pursuit
         iv. Sources of International Maritime Law
         v. The rights of coastal and Landlocked states in navigating seas and International straits
         vi. Principles of International Maritime law.
         vii. The jurisprudential issues on International Maritime law.

The LLM in International Maritime Law provides opportunities for students to develop and
demonstrate knowledge and understanding, qualities, skills and other attributes in both
International Maritime and commercial Law..

AIM OF THE COURSE

The general aim of this course is to equip you with the knowledge and skills needed to undertake
a meaningful study in the International Maritime Law. It aims at making you an informed reader
and analyst of Maritime Law. The programme develops leading knowledge and awareness of
international trade and maritime law, increasing understanding of how commercial trade ventures
may give rise to legal issues

LLM in International Maritime Law is aim to educate law graduates and practicing lawyers in
National and International Maritime Law which allows them to make a contribution to the shipping
industry. Being a highly specialized course it deals in sophisticate new areas of Maritime and
Ocean Laws. The course is highly relevant and service oriented. The primary objective of LLM
Maritime Law is to produce law professionals who can critically evaluate the laws and legal
systems pertaining to water bodies and ports for seagoing vessels from a juristic perspective. It
also fosters expertise specialized in areas of maritime law, jurisprudence and other emerging laws
rising out of international disputes. On successful completion of the course, a law professional will
enhance his/her drafting skills pertaining to International Maritime Contracts. The course ensures
that its participants become qualified legal experts capable of addressing legal issues arising in
Fisheries and Marine sectors.

                                                               3
Studying LLM is really essential in Nigeria as Nigeria is a major maritime state in Africa. However
specialized knowledge in a legal subject like International Maritime Law is a sign of having an
edge over others. It can help carving our niche career specially when there is a dearth of maritime
lawyers in Nigeria. This course approaches law in relation to how it is applied in practice. Students with
a prior degree in Law may continue their studies to a PhD degree in International Maritime Law.

The Department's LL.M. programme provides students with a specialised education in maritime
law from an international perspective. Particular emphasis is placed on the study of shipping law,
especially the international regulatory law of maritime transport to ensure maritime safety and the
protection of the marine environment. The programme also covers the commercial law aspects of
shipping including the carriage of goods by sea and marine insurance as well as public international
law and law of the sea. Unlike traditional programmes, Department`s LL.M. programme offers a
distinctive international study of maritime law. Major systems of law in the world, including the
civil and the common law systems, are comparatively considered in relation to maritime affairs.
An international faculty brings to the classroom the legislative and judicial experience of leading
maritime jurisdictions. The programme is also designed to provide training in the development
and drafting of maritime legislation. Intensive drafting exercises are carried out taking into account
both the international law on the subject as well national maritime policies and objectives.

Finally, the LL.M. programme is an exciting inter­cultural journey as the Department draws
candidates from across the globe. The department promotes a spirit of mutual understanding and
cooperation between cultures, paving the way for future collaboration between graduates in
combining efforts towards international unification of maritime law.

WORKING THROUGH THIS COURSE
As mentioned earlier, the course contains four modules of 17 units which blend theory with
practice in the field of Law of the sea as a major area studies. You should painstakingly go through
all the units in this course, taking note of the essential concepts introduced to you. You should also
do the Self-Assessment Exercise and the Tutor-Marked Assignments. For you to drive maximum
benefit from the course, you should consult as many of the reference/suggestions for further
reading given at the end of each unit.

                                                               4
COURSE MATERIALS
The major materials to be used for the course are:
This Course Guide;
Study Units;
Textbooks;
Assignment File; and Presentation Schedule.
In addition, you must obtain the textbooks as they are not provided by NOUN. You are required
to obtain them in your own responsibility. You may purchase your own copies. Your tutor will
always be available should you have any problem in obtaining these textbooks.

STUDY UNITS
There are 17 study units in the course and you will need between fifteen (15) to twenty (20) weeks
to study them thoroughly, working through the exercise/assignment and consulting the
recommended texts.
TEXT BOOKS AND REFERENCES:
To be bit acquainted with the maritime law and still want to know more and keep yourself updated,
here are some of the best books on the same which would definitely quench your thirst for
knowledge about all of the admiralty laws, by providing you with almost every aspect of maritime
questions and offences including seafaring activities of merchant ships, passenger liners, yachts,
navies and navigation; and also shipbuilding, seamanship, sailing ships etc,
1. Maritime Law by Christopher Hill
2. Coastal State Regulation of International Shipping by Lindy S. Johnson

                                                               5
3.Admiralty and Maritime Law by Robert Force

4. Maritime Law by Yvonne Baatz
5. Admiralty and Maritime Law (Hornbook Series Student Edition)
ASSESSMENT
There are self-assessment exercise, there will be TMAs which is over 30 percent and the final
exams which is 70 percent. However the pass mark in the a student must get 50 and above
COURSE OVERVIEW/PRESENTATION
The sea is vital to human existence for commerce, navigation routes, and as a major source of
natural resources. Legal expertise in the issues surrounding the law in these areas is always in
demand. LLM in International Maritime Law will give you an in-depth understanding of the law
concerning contracts for the carriage of goods, marine insurance, international trade and law of the
sea. Learning from experts with high level academic and practical experience, you will gain
specialist knowledge and skills that are highly valued by employers, and open up a range of
exciting career opportunities.
Graduates of the LLM in International Maritime Law are well positioned for stimulating and
rewarding career opportunities. Improving your employability is a key priority for us, and we
organise a range of events to help, including the annual LLM careers fair, which gives you the
opportunity to meet local and international law firms, as well as networking events and visits to
leading practices in the City of London.

TUTOR MARKED ASIGNMENT
There will be turtor marked assignment to be administered by the Lecturer

FINAL EXAMINATION AND GRADING

                                                               6
COURSE SCORE DISTRIBUTION

     30% of the final grade is based on the TMAs
     70% of the final grade is based on examination.
     Seminar presentation

COURSE OVERVIEW/ PRESENTATION

This is a three credits unit course running in the spring semesters of an academic year for Master
of International Maritime Laws students. The Master's programme is part of the strategy of the
Law Faculty on focusing on internationalization and legal issues pertaining maritime law. The
programme aims through its courses and master's thesis to give the students a broad introduction
and knowledge of the International Maritime Law, including its development, politics and
institutional aspects. Also the course shall add to the skills of the students to identify, analyze,
explain and solve legal problems; both on a theoretical and a practical level. There will be a special
focus on the relevance and application of international Maritime Law in relation to human
activities in the sea.

The objective is to be achieved through active participation of the students during the courses;
through study, discussions, and papers. Lectures will provide for the introduction to the themes
while problem-based seminars will make most of the teaching where students and teachers identify
and discuss legal questions. The objective is also to qualify the students for careers within a broad
specter of areas; both at national and international level. Candidates will be qualified for jobs
within the United Nations and its specialized agencies, in national diplomatic service as well as
public administration and industry and commerce.

It covers the main principles of international Maritime law and a case study of a selection of
international treaties concerning the use, exploitation and management of the resources of the seas
and oceans of the world. The course will also examine some leading cases decided by international
courts and tribunals concerning the law of the sea. It will focus on the 1982 United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea. It will also cover the evolution of the international law of the
sea, international efforts to regulate the delimitation of the maritime zones and exploitation of the
resources therein, a selection of other international treaties relating to the management,

                                                               7
conservation, exploitation of the resources of the seas and the case law developed by various
international courts and tribunals. The aim is to provide a thorough understanding of the current
regime of the law of the sea and the interplay between law and politics in this area.

The course focuses predominantly on international law, with a particular emphasis on the
International law of the sea. Students will acquire expertise in the multifaceted interface between
the different fields of international law, whilst also developing specialist knowledge of the law
pertaining to the sea. The skills learnt on this programme are adaptable to work in international
bodies such as the United Nations, International Courts and Tribunals, and International Law
firms; as well as in roles relating to piracy or marine pollution. The ICC Commercial Crime
Services, the International Maritime Organisation, the Marine Management Organisation

HOW TO GET THE MOST FROM THIS COURSE

This Course is about the International Maritime Law. It is a postgraduate course for students who
are registered for Masters of Law Degree Programme. It is a useful study also to anyone who does
not intend to complete the degree course but wants to learn marine Law generally. This Course is
particularly concerned with maritime activities on the sea and oceans of the world. It comprises
two semester papers, namely: JIL 810 and JIL 820. Each of them is a 3-Credit Unit course,
implying a minimum study time of 8- hours per week, for the duration of each of the two semesters.
In the course. Maritime law or otherwise known as marine law, is an area of law that specialises
in issues that occur offshore. These include ocean policy, admiralty, and maritime commerce. Not
many realise that the rules governing the sea vary tremendously from those on land. From issues
such as accidents due to colliding fishing vessels, the discovery of sunken treasures, employees'
rights while working at sea, to conflicts arising from environmental issues. Maritime law covers
them all. Did you know that maritime law is one of the oldest and most established types of law in
the world?

TUTORS AND TUTORIALS

You are not alone in your journey through this course as there are facilitators and tutors to guide
and assist you. You should make sure you exploit this opportunity, especially during tutorials. If
you have read the course materials very well, you will able to identify the issues to be sorted out

                                                               8
with your facilitators/tutors. This simply means that you should not miss your tutorials and you
should adequately prepare for them.
SUMMARY
Although this course is an introduction to International Law of the sea, it exposes you to the
essentials of the law of the sea which comprises the rules governing the use of the sea, including
its resources and environment. The law of the sea is one of the principal subjects of international
law and is a mixture of treaty and established or emerging customary law. The law of the sea
covers rights, freedoms and obligations in areas such as shipping, territorial seas and waters and
the high seas, fishing, wrecks and cultural heritage, protection of the marine environment and
dispute settlement.

                                                               9
INTRODUCTION
GENERAL OVERVIEW OF THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME LAW
International Maritime law is a fundamental branch of law that regulates commerce and navigation
on the seas or other navigable waters. It covers a broad spectrum of matters such as the
development of legislation, both nationally and internationally; customs and excise regulations;
the fishing industry; human rights and employment issues usually relating to the crew; insurance
claims; property damage; the implications of stowaways on vessels; pollution; personal injuries;
wreck and salvage; piracy; and container and passenger liner matters, etc.

The origins of maritime law date back to antiquity as did trade between nations through sea
transport. It thus became increasingly necessary to expand this scope of the law as no country may
claim arbitrary jurisdiction over the seas. Consensus between nations also became vital in the face
of disputes. With time, the principles of maritime law were developed and refined. However it
must be noted that although general maritime law has developed internationally, it operates under
the auspices and laws of an individual country as each nation bases its own maritime law on the
general international regulations with the modifications and qualifications it deems essential and
suitable to its particular needs.

In addition to the above, maritime law regulates the enforcement of contracts and commonly makes
provision for damages to parties who have suffered some form of loss at the hands of a contracting
party that has failed to honour or perform in accordance with their agreement. Such a contractual
clause must be distinguished from the principle of general average which contemplates the
voluntary sacrifice made by the master of the ship in respect of cargo, equipment or funds in order
to mitigate further losses or damage in an emergency. The loss suffered by parties is thus shared
amongst other parties who have shared in the relevant venture.

                                                              10
The exception of force majeure in contracts usually also exists which relieves a party from any
liabilities or obligations whenever an extraordinary or unpredictable vent occurs, such as a war,
strike, or an act of God.

Module 1: CONCEPTS AND NATURE OF THE INTERNATIONAL MARITIME LAW

Unit 1  The Concept of International Maritime Law

Unit 2  Historical Development of the International Maritime law

Unit 3  The Sources of International Maritime Law

Unit 4  The Components and principles of International Maritime Law

Module 2: DIVISION OF THE SEA INTO MARITIME ZONES

Unit 1  Internal waters
Unit 2  Territorial Sea
Unit 3  Contiguous Zone
Unit 4  Exclusive Economic Zone
Unit 5  The High sea and Coastal jurisdiction over Merchant ship

Module 3: THE HIGH SEA AND ITS USES

Unit 1  Scope and freedom of the High Sea
Unit 2  The uses of High sea
Unit 3  International Sea Bed Authority

        11
Unit 4  Access to the Sea for Landlocked states and International Straits

Module 4: THE REGIME CONTRACT OF CARRIAGE OF GOODS BY SEA

Unit 1  Definition and Historical development of contract of carriage by sea
Unit 2  Types of contract of carriage of goods by sea
Unit 3  Bills of lading contracts
Unit 4  International Trade Law

MODULE 1: THE CONCEPT AND NATURE OF INTERNATIONAL MARITIME LAW
Unit 1 The Concept and Characteristics of International maritime law
1.1 Introduction
International maritime law is a branch of international law, cutting across public and private law.
It has helped defined and make more uniform a very complex area of law both within and outside
Coastal. It consists of a regulatory system for international shipping for the purposes of trade
facilitation, maritime safety, environment protection, and security. It is one of the most detailed
and systematically regulated fields of international law. It is also a field where industry-developed
standard contracts draw heavily from international instruments and market practices aimed at
harmonization.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
It is intended that at the of this unit should be able to:
i. Define the Concept of international maritime Law

                                                              12
ii. The Nature and Characteristics of Maritime Law
iii. Explain the Historical development of International maritime and
iv. List the sources of International maritime Law.
1.3 Definition of International Maritime Law
Maritime law has been variously described and defined in ways that reflect subjective perception
as well as semantics. One view is that maritime law provides the legal framework for maritime
transport. Another is that maritime law comprises a body of legal rules and concepts concerning
the business of carrying goods and passengers by water. Both are narrow in scope but the first is
more general and could be construed as embracing matters on maritime, which extend beyond the

purely private domain of maritime business and commerce, into areas of public concern.

Others submitted that the distinction is artificial and anomalous, and in support of their proposition
point to the etymological root of the word maritime, which derived from Latin, means of or
pertaining to the sea. In this broad sense, the term maritime law accommodates the entire body of
laws, rules, legal concepts and processes that relate to the use of marine resources, ocean
commerce, and navigation.

The expression Admiralty Law, used in many countries with Anglo Saxon legal traditions, adds to
the terminology debate. Admiralty law refers to the body of law including procedural rules
developed by the English Courts of Admiralty, in their exercise of jurisdiction over matters. This
jurisdiction was distinctively different from that of the common law courts. Admiralty law thus
originally encompassed the subject - matter over which the admiralty courts possessed inherent
jurisdiction imbued through a process of evolution. Subsequently, the subject matter which bore a
maritime character was codified and enumerated by statute. Interestingly enough, while in the
English language, the word admiralty originates in the office of the Lord Admiral; its root meaning
is derived from Arabic.

In Common Law jurisdictions, Admiralty Law often connotes the Maritime Law relating to wet
matters, i.e., those involving ships when they are at sea, as distinguished from dry matters also
involving ships but pertaining only to commercial aspects that are essentially land-based issues.
While Maritime Law consists of two broad elements, dividing it into two neat compartments and

                                                              13
labeling them public and private, is rather an over - simplification. The shipping industry is
involved in many matters of general law and non-maritime legal transactions which are not part of
the lex maritima. It is well acknowledged that many aspects of commercial maritime law are in
fact derived from the lex mercatoria8. The bifurcation may be attributable to perceptions that are
politically tinged.

Professor Gold states: the new law of the sea has in the past decade addressed itself to almost all
areas of ocean use except the one that since before the dawn of history, has been pre-eminent - the
use of the ocean as a means to transport people and their goods from place to place on this planet,
so much more of which is water than is land. Marine transport has been discussed in an almost
abstract manner, as if it did not really fit or belong within the public domain but needed to be
confined to the more private region of international commerce, which was considered to be outside
the scope of the law of the sea.

Professor Sanborn had this to say: The word maritime law, as commonly used today, denotes that
part of the whole law which deals chiefly with the legal relations arising from the use of ships. But
in the earlier period, of which this work treats, the law maritime had a considerably wider scope.
It dealt not merely with the modern Admiralty law, but also with the primitive. Ancestors of some
branches of our modern commercial law, dealt too, with the germs of that public law which we
today style international law.

International Maritime law is the body of international legal principles which governs, in
particular, marine commerce and navigation, business transacted at sea or relating to navigation,
to ships and shipping, to seamen, to transportation of persons and property at sea and marine affairs
generally. It is a also a body of international laws, international conventions, and treaties ,
international customs that govern private maritime business and other nautical matters, such as
shipping or offenses occurring on open water. International rules that governs nautical issues and
private maritime disputes. Admiralty law consists of both domestic law on maritime activities, and
private international law governing the relationships between private parties operating or using
ocean-going ships. While each legal jurisdiction usually has its own legislation governing maritime
matters, the international nature of the topic and the need for uniformity has, since 1900, led to
considerable international maritime law developments, including numerous multilateral treaties.

                                                              14
 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Give a succinctly definition of maritime law in your
 own words

1.4 Characteristics of International Maritime Law and Business
i.International Nature

Although regulated to a large extent by national legislation, maritime law in almost all jurisdictions
is clearly shaped by international influences, in particular international conventions. This is due to
the fact that shipping by its very nature involves international relations. The ocean-going vessels
flying the flag of a state operate in all waters throughout the world and sail from country to country.
Vessels often are supplied and repaired in foreign ports. Cargo may be damaged or lost while at
sea in the course of an international voyage or in a foreign port, and likewise seamen may be
injured on the high seas or in the waters of foreign countries. Such background facilitated the
development of common international usage and practice since antiquity. The common universal
usage and practices were subsequently adopted by national laws. Maritime law is thus a specialized
domestic law that cannot avoid international influences. This may in part be the reason why judges
and lawyers who deal with maritime law consider themselves as specialists with an international
background.

ii.Complete Legal System

The second important characteristic of maritime law is its breadth. Maritime law is a complete
legal system, just as the civil law and the common law are complete legal systems. Maritime law,
incidentally, is much older than the common law and probably contemporaneous with the advent
of the civil law. That maritime law is a complete legal system can be readily seen from its
component parts. As noted by William Tetley, maritime law has had its own law of contract of
sale of ships, of service (towage), of lease chartering, of carriage of goods by sea, of insurance
(marine insurance being the precursor of insurance ashore, of agency ship chandlers, of pledge
(bottomry and respondentia), of hire ( masters and seamen), of compensation for sickness and
personal injury (maintenance and cure) and risk distribution (general average]. It is and has been
a national and an international law probably the first private international law. It also has had its

                                                              15
own public law and public international law. Maritime law has and has had, as well, its own courts
and procedures from earliest times.

As will be seen in due time, International maritime law seeks to regulate personal and property
relationships as well as contractual and tortuous relationships. The comprehensiveness of the law
can also be seen in its administrative and few criminal provisions. In short, maritime law is a
comprehensive system of law concerning maritime matters both public and private, with the later
forming the major part.

iii.Special Legal Jargons

The study of maritime law usually employs the use of complex jargons which, in most cases, are
alien to other areas of law. Understanding the subject matter without first knowing such shipping
terms may often be difficult. The presence of different jargons peculiar to this area of law may
well be attributable to its unique development. Early maritime law the basis of modern maritime
law is distinguishable from the development of other areas of law. Though first developed in
continental Europe, the law relating to shipping was, in origin, based on customs only- custom and
usage of the sea. Though the forthcoming discussions reveal many of these special jargons, we
may tentatively note some of them here: charter party, maritime lien, general average, and salvage.

Charter party: A charter party is a contract of lease of a ship in whole or in part for a long or
short period of time or for a particular voyage.

Maritime lien: A secured claim against a ship and sometimes against cargo or bunkers in respect
of services provided to the vessel or damages done by it.

General average: The monetary contribution required of ship-owners and cargo owners or their
respective insurers in respect of general average expenditures and general average sacrifices.
Cargo's claim for general average contributions against the ship is secured by either a maritime
lien or a statutory right in rem depending on the jurisdiction concerned.

Salvage: Rendering assistance to ships at distress. Rules awarding such assistance have long been
prescribed in various maritime nations.

                                                              16
 2. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: List at least five characteristics of maritime law and
 business

1.5 The Four Pillars of International maritime Law

International waters are any waters outside the jurisdictions of a coastal State and foreign countries.
Ships sailing in international waters typically fall under the country of a ship's registry, for
maritime laws. However, in certain circumstances, maritime laws of the nearest country could
apply. To illustrate, a ship's registry is Nassau. When the ship is sailing in international waters,
Nassau's maritime laws would apply in most cases.

The Pillars are:

i. SOLAS: Safety of Life at Sea ­ is generally regarded as the most important of all international
Conventions. The international SOLAS Convention sets minimum safety requirements for the
construction, equipment, and operation of merchant ships. The 14 chapters currently included in
the SOLAS Convention consist of a range of codes and regulations which specify the minimum
safety standards for the area mentioned above. The SOLAS Convention does not apply to all ships.
Only vessels travelling international waters excluding warships, cargo ships of less than 500 GT,
non-propelled ships, wooden ships, non-commercial pleasure yachts and fishing vessels will be
held accountable to the standards enforced by SOLAS.

ii. MARPOL: The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships ­ is the
main international maritime Convention covering the prevention of environmental pollution by
ships. MARPOL covers pollution prevention from a routine operational and accidental
perspective. In addition to setting standards for the discharge and cleaning processes of operational
shipping waste, the MARPOL Convention also sets standards for the stowing, handling, and
transfer of hazardous cargoes. Unlike SOLAS, the MARPOL Convention applies to vessels of all
types flagged under a State member of the Convention, or that operate within its jurisdiction,
regardless of where they sail. Signatory flag states are obliged to incorporate MARPOL
requirements into domestic law.

                                                              17
iii. The STCW: Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for Seafarers sets
minimum qualification standards for personnel and crew of all levels on board a ship, including
masters, officers and watch personnel. Similar to the other pillars, the main purpose of the
international Convention is to promote safety at sea, alongside the protection of the marine
environment. STCW is helping to further achieve these goals through a common agreement which
ensures similar programmes of training with equal standards are carried out by all seafarers of
equal role and rank globally. The STCW Convention requires that training leading to the issue of
certification is provided by an approved source.

iv. The MLC: Maritime Labour Convention sets out minimum standards for seafarers working
on a ship. The comprehensive Convention provides an internationally recognised, single source of
regulation and guidance. Under the MLC, seafarers will have minimum working and living rights
covering among other areas such as: Contracts of employment, pay, manning levels etc.

1.6 Summary

In this Unit we were able to consider the various definitions of international maritime law and
its characteristics. Maritime law is a body of law applicable to maritime commerce and vessels.
The key to understanding maritime law is to understand that it has developed to promote
maritime commerce, which is a matter of international concern and practice. As a consequence,
while most maritime nations have their own maritime law, the principles of maritime law are
mostly consistent among maritime nations, and decisions based on general maritime law
principles are widely recognized around the world.

Admiralty law is generally synonymous with maritime law although admiralty law is more
correctly understood as a subset of maritime law. Admiralty law evolved as an amalgam of
international common law and civil law or codes, decided by judges who would look to
international practices and customs, as well as to the local civil law, to determine what
standards to apply to maritime disputes. The important characteristic of maritime law is its
breadth. Maritime law is a complete legal system, just as the civil law and the common law are
complete legal systems. It also has had its own public law and public international law.

                                                              18
Maritime is the masculine accusative form of mare (sea), derived from maritimus, meaning "of the
sea. The foundation of maritime law is a significant body of well-established common law,
developed from ancient practices of maritime commerce and from the decisions of maritime courts
applying those standards of traditional admiralty law, in what has become known in the U.S. courts
as the general maritime law. Maritime law also includes statutory enactments, many of which are
driven by, or at least based upon, international conventions and agreements, as well as established
maritime customs. In some ways, maritime law has developed apart from and somewhat in tension
with local civil laws. It has done so because the fundamental purpose of maritime law is different
from that of the civil law. While the civil law developed to help maintain a civil society and resolve
disputes between members of a single nation, maritime law developed to pro-mote the just and
speedy resolution of disputes among per-sons from possibly different countries involved in
maritime commerce

The designation of a matter as an admiralty matter brings it within federal jurisdiction, and makes
it subject to the federal maritime law. The necessary consequence is that the state law that would
otherwise apply is supplanted by the federal rule of decision. To balance the national interest in a
uniform maritime law with the local state interest in preserving state jurisdiction over local matters,
the federal Judiciary Acts have noted that the federal courts have original jurisdiction, exclusive
of the courts of the states over any civil case of admiralty or maritime jurisdiction,but then goes
on, "saving to suitors in all cases all other remedies to which they are otherwise entitled (this is
referred to as the Savings to Suitors clause.

1.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

John G. O'Connor (2011-10-28). "Admiralty Jurisdiction and Canadian Maritime Law in the
Federal Courts: The next forty years" (PDF). Retrieved 2012

Christopher J. Giaschi (2000-10-03). "The Constitutional implications of Ordon v. Grail and the
expanding definition of Canadian maritime law". Archived from the original on 2011-03-19.
Retrieved 2012-01-10.

Joseph R. Oliveri (2008). "Converse-Erie: The Key to Federalism in an Increasingly
Administrative State" (essay). Archived June 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine

Robinson, Gustavus H. (1939). Handbook of Admiralty Law in the United States. Hornbook
Series. St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co.

                                                              19
Nathalie Mouly. "Université Paris 2 Panthéon-Assas Droit maritime (1230) programme de cours".
Archived from the original on 4 March 2016. Retrieved 17 August 2015.
3.
 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What are the five pillars of International Maritime
 Law
1.8 Possible Answers to Self-Assessment Exercise no 1.
International maritime law, also known as the Law of the Sea, refers to the laws used to govern
international waters. It consists of a body of conventions, regulations, and treaties used to govern
nautical issues and regulate maritime organizations.

Unit 2 Historical Development of international maritime Law
2.1 Introduction
The origins of maritime law go back to antiquity. Because no country has jurisdiction over the
seas, it has been necessary for nations to reach agreements regarding ways of dealing with ships,
crews, and cargoes when disputes arise. The earliest agreements were probably based on a body
of ancient customs that had developed as practical solutions to common problems. Many of these
customs became part of Roman civil law. After the fall of the Roman Empire, maritime commerce
was disrupted for about 500 years.

After maritime activity was resumed in the Middle Ages, various disputes arose and laws were
formulated to deal with them. Gradually the laws of the sea were compiled; among the best-known
collections of early maritime law are the Laws of Oleron and the Black Book of the Admiralty, an
English compilation prepared during the 14th and 15th centuries. Special courts to administer sea
laws were set up in some countries. In Britain today, maritime law is administered by courts of the
admiralty.

                                                              20
2.2 Learning Outcomes
It is intended that at the end of this unit you should be able to

i.Analysis the Historical Evolution of the Law of International Maritime Law.

ii. Explain the origin of maritime law of the Mediterranean's

iii. List he first major codes of maritime Law

2.3 Origin of Maritime Law
The origins of maritime law go back to antiquity. Because no country has jurisdiction over the
seas, it has been necessary for nations to reach agreements regarding ways of dealing with ships,
crews, and cargoes when disputes arise. The earliest agreements were probably based on a body
of ancient customs that had developed as practical solutions to common problems. Many of these
customs became part of Roman civil law. After the fall of the Roman Empire, maritime commerce
was disrupted for about 500 years.

After maritime activity was resumed in the Middle Ages, various disputes arose and laws were
formulated to deal with them. Gradually the laws of the sea were compiled; among the best-known
collections of early maritime law are the Laws of Oleron and the Black Book of the Admiralty, an
English compilation prepared during the 14th and 15th centuries. Special courts to administer sea
laws were set up in some countries. In Britain today, maritime law is administered by courts of the
admiralty

2.3.1 Ancient maritime legislation
Though the marine law of modern Europe has its foundations laid in the jurisprudence of the
ancients, there is no certain evidence that either the Phoenicians, Carthaginians, or any of the states
of Greece, formed any authoritative digest of naval law. Those powers were distinguished for
navigation and commerce, and the Athenians in particular were very commercial, and they kept
up a busy intercourse with the Greek colonies in Asia Minor, and on the borders of the Euxine and
the Hellespout, in the islands of the Aegean sea, and in Sicily and Italy. They were probably the

                                                              21
greatest naval power in all antiquity. Themistocles had the sagacity to discern the wonderful
influence and controlling ascendancy of naval power.

The Athenians encouraged, by their laws, navigation and trade; and there was a particular
jurisdiction at Athens for the cognizance of contracts, and controversies between merchants and
mariners. There were numerous laws relative to the rights and interests of merchants, and of their
navigation; and in many of them there was an endeavor to remove, as much as possible, the process
and obstacles which afflicted the operations of commerce.

The universality and stability of the Greek tongue were owing, no doubt, in a considerable degree,
to the conquests of Alexander, to the loquacity of the Greeks, and the inimitable excellence of the
language itself; but it is essentially to be imputed to the commercial genius of the people, and to
the factories which they established, and the trade and correspondence which they maintained
throughout the then known parts of the eastern world.

The Rhodians were the earliest people that actually created, digested, and promulgated a system
of marine law. They obtained the sovereignty of the seas about nine hundred years before the
Christian era, and were celebrated for their naval power and discipline. Their laws concerning
navigation were received at Athens, and in all the islands of the Aegean sea, and throughout the
coasts of the Mediterranean, as part of the law of nations. Cicero, who in early life studied rhetoric
at Rhodes, says,4 that the power and civil discipline of that republic continued down within his
time of memory, in vigor and with glory. We are indebted to the Roman law for all our knowledge
of the commercial jurisprudence of the Rhodians. Not only their arts and dominion have perished,
but even their nautical laws and usages would have entirely and forever disappeared in the wreck
of nations, had it not been for the superior wisdom of their masters, the Romans; and one solitary
title in the pandects,5 contains all the fragments that have floated down to modern times, of their
once celebrated maritime code.

The Romans prohibited commerce to persons of birth, rank, and fortune and no senator was
allowed to own a vessel larger than a boat sufficient to carry his own corn and fruits. The navigation
which the Romans cultivated, was for the purposes of war, and not of commerce, except so far as
was requisite for the supply of the Roman market with provisions. This is the reason, that amidst

                                                              22
such a vast collection of wise regulations as are embodied in the fabric of the Roman law, affecting
almost every interest and relation in human life.

2.4 Maritime legislation of the middle ages.

Upon the revival of commerce, after the destruction of the Western empire of the Romans,
maritime rules became necessary. The earliest code of modern sea laws was compiled for the free
and trading republic of Amalphi, in Italy, about the time of the first crusade, towards the end of
the eleventh century. This compilation, which has been known by the name of the Amalphitan
Table, superseded the ancient laws; and its authority was acknowledged by all the states of Italy.
Other states and cities began to form collections of maritime law; and a compilation of the usages
and laws of the Mediterranean powers was made and published, under the title of the Consolato
del mare. This commercial code is said to have been digested at Barcelona, in the Catalan tongue,
during the middle ages, by order of the kings of Arragon. The Spaniards vindicate the claim of
their country to the honor of this compilation; and the opinion of Casaregis, who published an
Italian edition of it at Venice, in 1737, with an excellent commentary, and of Boucher, who in
1808 translated the Consolato into French, from an edition printed at Barcelona, in 1494, are in
favor of the Spanish claim.

The laws of Oleron were the next collection in point of time and celebrity. They were collected
and promulgated in the island of Oleron, on the coast of France, in or about the time of Richard I.
The French lawyers in the highest repute, such as Cleirac, Valin, and Emerigon, have contended,
that the laws of Oleron were a French production, compiled under the direction of Queen Eleanor,
Dutchess of Guienne, in the language of Gascony, for the use of the province of Guienne, and the
navigation on the coasts of the Atlantic; and that her son, Richard I, who was King of England, as
well as Duke of Guienne, adopted and enlarged this collection. Selden, Coke, and Blackstone, on
the other hand, have claimed it as an English work, published by Richard I in his character of King
of England. It is a proof of the obscurity that covers the early history of the law, that the author of
such an important code of legislation as the laws of Oleron, should have been left in so much
obscurity as to induce profound antiquaries to adopt different conclusions, in like manner as Spain
and Italy have asserted rival claims to the origin of the Consolato. The laws of Oleron were
borrowed from the Rhodian laws, and the Consolato, with alterations and additions, adapted to the

                                                              23
trade of western Europe. They have served as a model for subsequent sea laws, and have at all
times been extremely respected in France, and perhaps equally so in England, though not under
the impulse of the same national feeling of partiality. They have been admitted as authority on
admiralty questions in the courts of justice in this country.

The laws of Wisbuy were compiled by the merchants of the city of Wisby, in the island of
Gothland, in the Baltic sea, about the year 1288. It had been contended by some writers, that these
laws were more ancient than those of Oleron, or even than the Consolato. But Cleirac says, they
were but a supplement to the laws of Oleron, and constituted the maritime law of all the Baltic
nations north of the Rhine, in like manner as the laws of Oleron governed in England and France,
and the provisions of the Consolato on the shores of the Mediteranean. They were, on many points,
a repetition of the judgments of Oleron, and became the basis of the ordinances of the Hanseatic
League.

The renowned Hanseatic association was begun at least as early as the middle of the thirteenth
century, and it originated with the cities of Lubec, Bremen, and Hamburgh. The free and privileged
Hanse Towns became the asylum of commerce, and the retreats of civilization, when the rest of
Europe was subjected to the iron sway of the feudal system, and the northern seas ware infested
by savage clans, and roving barbarians.

2.5 Modern Maritime legislation.

All the former ordinances and compilations on maritime law, were in a great degree superseded in
public estimation, their authority diminished, and their luster eclipsed by the French ordinance
upon commerce in 1673, which treated largely of negotiable paper; and more especially by the
celebrated marine ordinance of 1681. This monument of the wisdom of the reign of Louis XIV,
far more durable and more glorious than all the military trophies won by the valor of his arms, was
erected under the influence of the genius and patronage of Colbert, who was not only the minister
and secretary of state to the king, but inspector and general superintendant of commerce and
navigation. It was by the special direction of that minister, and with a view to illustrate the
advantages of the commerce of the Indies, that Huet wrote his learned history of the commerce
and navigation of the ancients. The vigilance and capacity of the ministry of Louis communicated
uncommon vigor to commercial inquiries. They created a marine which shed splendor on his reign,

                                                              24
and corresponded, in some degree, with the extent of his resources. It required such a work as the
ordinance to which I have referred, to consolidate the establishment of the maritime power which
had been formed by the sagacity of his counsels. In addition to these general codes of commercial
legislation, there have been a number of local ordinances, of distinguished credit, relating to
nautical matters and marine insurance, such as the ordinances of Barcelona, Florence, Amsterdam,
Antwerp, Copenhagen, and Konigsberg. There have also been several treatises on nautical subjects
by learned civilians in the several countries of Europe, which are of great authority and reputation.

The English nation never had any general and solemnly enacted code of maritime law, resembling
those which have been mentioned as belonging to the other European nations. This deficiency was
supplied, not only by several extensive private compilations, but it has been more eminently and
more authoritatively supplied, by a series of judicial decisions, commencing about the middle of
the last century. Those decisions have shown, to the admiration of the world, the masterly
acquaintance of the English judiciary with the principles and spirit of commercial policy and
general jurisprudence, and they have afforded undoubted proofs of the entire independence,
impartiality and purity of the administration of justice.

Since the year 1798, the decisions of Sir William Scott, now Lord Stowell on the admiralty side
of Westminster Hall, have been read and admired in every region of the republic of letters, as
models of the most cultivated and the most enlightened human reason. The English maritime law
can now be studied in the adjudged cases with at least as much profit, and with vastly more
pleasure, than in the dry and formal didactic treatises and ordinances professedly devoted to the
science. The doctrines are there reasoned out at large, and practically applied The arguments at the
bar, and the opinions from the bench, are intermingled with the gravest reflections, the most
scrupulous morality, the soundest policy, and a thorough acquaintance with all the various topics
that concern the great social interests of mankind.

The reports of judicial decisions in the several states, and especially in the states of Massachusetts,
New York, and Pennsylvania, evince great attention to maritime questions, and they contain
abundant proofs, that our courts have been dealing largely with the business of an enterprising and
commercial people. Maritime law became early and anxiously an object of professional research.
As for the evolution of Seaborne transport, the earliest channels of commerce, and rules for

                                                              25
resolving disputes involving maritime trade were developed early in recorded history. Early
historical records of these laws include the Rhodian law, of which no primary written specimen
has survived, but which is alluded to in other legal texts Roman and Byzantine legal codes, and
later the customs of the Consulate of the Sea or the Hanseatic League. In southern Italy the
Ordinamenta et consuetudo maris 1063 at Trani and the Amalfian Laws were in effect from an
early date.

Bracton noted further that admiralty law was also used as an alternative to the common law in
Norman England, which previously required voluntary submission to it by entering a plea seeking
judgment from the court. In England, a special Admiralty Court handles all admiralty cases.
Despite early reliance upon civil law concepts derived from the Corpus Juris Civilis of Justinian,
the English Admiralty Court is very much a common law court, albeit a sui generis tribunal
initially somewhat distanced from other English courts. After around 1750, as the industrial
revolution took hold and English maritime commerce burgeoned, the Admiralty Court became a
proactive source of innovative legal ideas and provisions to meet the new situation. The Judicature
Acts of 1873-1875 abolished the Admiralty Court as such, and it became conflated in the new
"Probate, Divorce & Admiralty division of the High Court. However, when the PDA was abolished
and replaced by a new "Family Division, admiralty jurisdiction passed to a so-called "Admiralty
Court" which was effectively the Queen's Bench Division sitting to hear nautical cases. The
Senior Courts Act 1981 then clarified the admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court, so England
once again has a distinct Admiralty Court (albeit no longer based in the Royal Courts of Justice,
but in the Rolls Building.

English Admiralty courts were a prominent feature in the prelude to the American Revolution. For
example, the phrase in the Declaration of Independence For depriving us in many cases, of the
benefits of Trial by Jury refers to the practice of the UK Parliament giving the Admiralty Courts
jurisdiction to enforce The Stamp Act in the American Colonies. This power has been awarded
because the Stamp Act was unpopular in America, so that a colonial jury would be unlikely to
convict any colonist of its violation. However, since English admiralty courts have never had trial
by jury, a colonist charged with breaching the Stamp Act could be more easily convicted by the
Crown.

                                                              26
Admiralty law became part of the law of the United States as it was gradually introduced through
admiralty cases arising after the adoption of the U.S. Constitution in 1789. Many American
lawyers who were prominent in the American Revolution were admiralty and maritime lawyers in
their private lives. Those included are Alexander Hamilton in New York and John Adams in
Massachusetts.

From the fact that the ancient Egyptians engaged in shipping on a wide scale, it can be inferred
that they had at least rudimentary laws regulating that activity, although no trace of any has been
found thus far. Nor is there anything known of any maritime laws of the Phoenicians, who
succeeded the Egyptians as commercial leaders in the Mediterranean. That Rhodes was a major
source of maritime law, however, is clearly indicated in two passages from the Digest (ad 533) of
the Roman emperor Justinian. The first quotes the emperor Antoninus (reigned ad 138­161) in a
case of plunder following a shipwreck: "I am indeed lord of the world, but the Law is the lord of
the sea. This matter must be decided by the maritime law of the Rhodians, provided that no law of
ours is opposed to it. The second is a statement of the basic law of general average, which the
Digest attributes to the Rhodians. Average here means any loss sustained by a vessel or its cargo.
When one segment of a maritime venture is sacrificed to save the others, the average is described
as general, and the owners of the property saved must help make good the loss. Thus, if cargo is
jettisoned in a successful effort to refloat a grounded vessel, the owners of the vessel and of the
cargo saved are obliged to bear proportionate shares of the loss sustained by the owner of the cargo
singled out for sacrifice.

Rome did not become a maritime power until the Punic wars of the 3rd century bc. From the fact
that the Romans were allies of the Rhodians and from the references in the Digest, it is logical to
assume that Roman maritime law borrowed heavily from that of Rhodes. Acknowledging Rhodes
as the birthplace of maritime jurisprudence, the maritime code of the later Eastern Empire, dating
from the 7th or 8th century ad, was called the Rhodian Sea Law.

Because the Mediterranean, under Roman control, was not only the centre of the Western world
but also its principal commercial highway, European maritime law evolved as a uniform,
supranational, comprehensive body of law--a characteristic which, though sometimes threatened
by the spread of nationalism, has never been lost completely. The barbarian invaders who moved

                                                              27
south were not seafarers, and the principal Mediterranean seaports were thus able to maintain their
independence. Moreover, the conquered peoples were permitted to keep the Roman law to which
they had become accustomed, and in the field of maritime jurisprudence the transition into the
Middle Ages was therefore gradual. As certain Italian cities began to outstrip the Eastern Byzantine
Empire commercially, they formulated their own maritime laws, some dating as early as 1063.
Trani, Amalfi, Venice, and other Italian port cities all offered their own collections of laws.
Nevertheless, the next widely accepted body of sea laws was the Consolat de Mar, or Consulate
of the Sea" originally compiled at Barcelona in the 13th century. More elaborate than the earlier
codes, the Consolat was followed in Spain, Provence, and the Italian cities and had a significant
effect on the development of modern maritime law.

The earliest code to emerge beyond the Mediterranean was the Rolls of Oléron, named for an
island in the Bay of Biscay and apparently dating from the 12th century. Whether the Rolls were
of French or of Anglo-Norman origin, they became the nucleus of the maritime law not only of
England and France but also of Scotland, Flanders, Prussia, and Castile; and they are still
occasionally cited as authority, even by U.S. courts. The Rolls were closely followed in the Laws
of Wisby, headquarters of the Hanseatic League until 1361.

In continental Europe, loss of uniformity in the maritime law began with the late Renaissance and
accelerated with the rise of nationalism in the 17th century, which witnessed adoption of the
Maritime Code of Christian XI of Sweden 1667, the Marine Ordinances of Louis XIV of France
1681, and the Code of Christian V of Denmark 1683. Of these, the most significant were the
Ordinances, prepared under Louis XIV's finance minister, Jean-Baptiste Colbert, as part of his
comprehensive though unfulfilled plan for the codification of all French law. Established customs
of the sea, revised to suit the times, were made part of the national law, enforceable in the French
Admiralty Court, which was granted maritime jurisdiction to the exclusion of the old consular
courts, whose judges had been elected by the mariners themselves.

The individuality of the maritime law its separation from other types of law was accentuated by
the Ordinances, which gathered together in one code all of the criminal, private, procedural, and
public laws relating to the sea. Although the French Admiralty Court failed to survive the
Revolution that began in 1789, the substantive law embodied in the Ordinances was very closely

                                                              28
followed in the Code de Commerce, whose adoption in 1807 meant that the maritime law was
thereafter considered simply as a branch of commercial law, with consequent diminution of the
weight previously given to custom and usage. Furthermore, abolition of the Admiralty Court
resulted in the trial of maritime cases by the commercial courts, on which, in the smaller ports,
maritime interests might not be represented. In countries with codes based directly or indirectly on
the French commercial code, civil maritime cases, as well as nonmaritime commercial disputes,
are heard and decided by commercial courts.

Although the Code de Commerce was widely adopted in the first half of the 19th century, in some
cases by choice and in others by conquest, the German Commercial Code of 1861, revised in 1897,
marked a departure from French law, and revisions of the Spanish and Italian codes showed the
influence of the new German law. These, in turn, had their effect in countries under Italian and
Spanish influence.

Although the Pied Poudre courts, held primarily for the settlement of disputes at English fairs and
markets, also had special jurisdiction of seamen's cases, it is probable that the first English
tribunals to apply maritime law, with the Rolls of Oléron as a basis, were the courts of the Cinque
Ports. The High Court of Admiralty, which sat at London, and the Vice Admiralty Courts, set up
in the other ports, were a later development. They were named after the admiral, an officer whose
duties were at first solely administrative and military but were broadened early in the 14th century
to include disciplinary proceedings in such matters as piracy. The Admiralty Court is considered
as dating from 1360, when for the first time the admiral was expressly granted jurisdiction in civil
maritime cases. By the end of the 16th century the admiralty courts had come to exercise an
extremely wide jurisdiction, reaching far beyond saltwater transportation into many areas of
commercial law. But during the first half of the 17th century, the judges of the common-law courts
succeeded in divesting their competitors in the Admiralty of their commercial jurisdiction and in
restricting them to the adjudication of "things done upon the sea.

The Admiralty was a royal court with valuable emoluments. It functioned without the aid of juries,
following procedures borrowed from the Continent that were somewhat less dilatory and
cumbersome than those of the common-law courts, and applied the laws and customs of the sea to
the maritime controversies that came before it. For these reasons it was preferred by the merchants

                                                              29
and favoured by the Crown, which depended to a considerable extent on taxation of the merchants
for its revenues. Its jurisdiction therefore waxed and waned with the strength or weakness of the
reigning sovereign. Thus, it enjoyed wide jurisdiction under the Tudors, but its powers were
severely curtailed under succeeding monarchs and governments, and were never fully restored
until the passage of the first of the Admiralty Court Acts in the 19th century. Although the powers
of the English Admiralty are today quite broad, in practice it is rare for cases other than those
involving marine collisions and salvage to be brought before it. Controversies respecting charter
parties, ocean bills of lading, and marine insurance, for example, are more generally brought before
the Commercial Court.

In the United States, the federal district courts are by statute granted original jurisdiction, exclusive
of the courts of the States, of Any civil case of admiralty or maritime jurisdiction, saving to suitors
in all cases all other remedies to which they are otherwise entitled." This means, essentially, that
if a maritime claimant wishes to have his claim litigated in accordance with admiralty procedure
he must invoke the admiralty jurisdiction of the district courts. However, he is free to sue in a state
court, unless the defendant is a citizen of another state, in which case the suit may be tried as an
ordinary civil action in the district court.

Transportation of goods and passengers by water is one of the most ancient channels of commerce
on record.This mode of transportation was and still is indispensable for international trade since
ships are capable of carrying bulky goods which otherwise would not be carried. Rules governing
relationships among participants of sea-transport have also been known since c.1st millennium BC.

Ancient maritime rules derived from the customs of the early Egyptians, Phoenicians and the
Greeks who carried an extensive commerce in the Mediterranean Sea. The earliest maritime code
is credited to the island of Rhodes which is said to have influenced Roman law. It is generally
accepted that the earliest maritime laws were the Rhodian Sea Laws, which have been claimed to
date from 900 B.C., but which more likely appeared in the form recognized today during the period
from 500 to 300 B.C. These laws were recognized in the Mediterranean world as a method of
providing predictable treatment of merchants and their vessels. The complexity and attention to
detail found in the Rhodian Sea Laws demonstrated the sophistication of commerce and trade of

                                                              30
Ancient Greece a world of commerce, the center of which, Rhodes, was in a position to dictate
terms for trade.

These laws which derived their essential elements from Rhodian customs were afterwards leveled
up by Romans. There was a great enlargement of the application of the principles of the Roman
law in the revival of commerce consequent upon the growth of the Italian republics and the great
free cities of the Rhine and the Baltic Sea. Special tribunals were set up in the Mediterranean port
towns to judge disputes arising among seafarers. This activity eventually led to the recording of
individual judgments and the codification of customary rules by which courts become bound.
Three noted codes of maritime law whose principles were found in the Roman law, were
formulated in Europe during the three centuries between A.D. 1000 and A.D. 1300. One, Libre
del Consolat de mar of Barcellona was adopted by the cities on the Mediterranean; the second, the
Laws of Oleron prevailed in France and England; and the third, Laws of Wisby governed the great
free cities of the Hanseatic League on the Baltic.

The oldest of these codes was Consolato del Mare, or Regulation of the Sea, prepared at Barcelona.
It was a compilation of comprehensive rules for all maritime subjects. It, for example, dealt with
ownership of vessels, the duties and responsibilities of the masters or captains thereof, duties of
seamen and their wages, freight, salvage, jettison, average contribution, and the like. Libre del
Consolat de mar of Barcellona and the Tablets of Amalfi, one prepared at the famous of Italian
seaports, enjoyed authority far beyond the ports where they were promulgated. In essence, until
the rise of modern nations, maritime law did not derive its force from territorial sovereigns but
represented what was already conceived to be the customary law of the sea.

Eventually, as commerce from the Mediterranean moved northward and westward, sea codes
developed in northern European ports. Among the important medieval sea codes were the Laws of
Wisby (a Baltic port), the Laws of Hansa Towns (a Germanic league), and the Laws of Oleron a
French island. The Consolato del Mare was inspirational in the preparation of these later codes. In
particular, the Laws of Oleron, the second great code of maritime regulation, was inspired by the
Consolato del Mare. These three codes are called the three arches upon which rests modern
admiralty structure.

                                                              31
Contemporary maritime law is a mixture of ancient doctrines and new at laws both national and
international. Among the traditional principles of admiralty still in use are marine insurance,
general average and salvage. The welfare of the seaman, the ancient concept of maintenance and
cure" are also still in use today. The main reason for the continuous use of ancient principles of
law is the unchanging nature of basic hazards of seafaring. Since at least the end of the 19th century,
however, naval architecture and cargo handling have changed in significant ways. The extensive
use of crude oil carriers as well as carriers of liquefied natural gas has, for example, posed new
hazards and questions of liability for oil pollution and damage to the marine ecology and the
shorelines. As a result of this, modern maritime law consists of laws that are of historic origin and
of recent development. Note also that not all of the original principles of maritime law still apply.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Briefly describe the evolution of Maritime law up to
 present day.

2.6 Summary

In this unit you are able the learn the evolution and development of maritime Law. In English-
speaking countries, admiralty is sometimes used synonymously, but in a strict sense the term refers to
the jurisdiction and procedural law of courts whose origins may be traced to the office of Admiral.
Although etymologically maritime law and law of the sea are identical, the former term is generally applied
to private shipping law, whereas the latter, usually prefixed by international, has come to signify the
maritime segment of public international law. The Convention on the Law of the Sea, on the other hand, is
a UN agreement regarding territorial waters, sea lanes, and ocean resources. The Convention was originally
signed by 119 nations on Dec. 10, 1982.

From the fact that the ancient Egyptians engaged in shipping on a wide scale, it can be inferred
that they had at least rudimentary laws regulating that activity, although no trace of any has been
found thus far. Nor is there anything known of any maritime laws of the Phoenicians, who
succeeded the Egyptians as commercial leaders in the Mediterranean. That Rhodes was a major
source of maritime law, however, is clearly indicated in two passages from the Digest (AD 533)
of the Roman emperor Justinian.

                                                              32
The first quotes the emperor Antoninus in a case of plunder following a shipwreck: "I am indeed
lord of the world, but the Law is the lord of the sea. This matter must be decided by the maritime
law of the Rhodians, provided that no law of ours is opposed to it. The second is a statement of the
basic law of "general average," which the Digest attributes to the Rhodians. average, means any
loss sustained by a vessel or its cargo. When one segment of a maritime venture is sacrificed to
save the others, the average is described as general, and the owners of the property saved must
help make good the loss. Thus, if cargo is jettisoned in a successful effort to refloat a grounded
vessel, the owners of the vessel and of the cargo saved are obliged to bear proportionate shares of
the loss sustained by the owner of the cargo singled out for sacrifice.

Many modern-day principles are still found today in the general maritime law or in national
statutes or international conventions. For example, Rhodian law, which was probably an unwritten
lex maritima, had three of its principles of general average, recorded in the Digest of Justinian
jettison, cutting the mast and cutting the anchor) and this is the authority today for general average,
because the terms of general average are not set out in any national statute or international
convention. The York/Antwerp Rules are merely contactual terms of general average, which are
applicable only by agreement of the parties, usually in a bill of lading or charter party.

Roman law gave us and still gives us, the bottomry bond, the shipbuilding lien, a lien for ship
repairs, a lien for supplies for the crew and a freight lien on cargo. The Rôles of Oléron gave and
still gives us, amongst other things, more details on bottomry and more liens, the principles of
salvage and the rights between partners in the ownership of a ship probably the beginnings of
company law. The Admiralty had in particular the civilian saisie conservatoire the seizure before
judgment the attachment which was and is unknown in the common law.

 2. (SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE): Discuss only modern evolution of maritime law

2.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Cooper, James Fenimore. Afloat and Ashore. 1844. New York: AMS Press, 2004.
Dana, Richard Henry, Jr. The Seaman's Friend. 1841. Mineola, N.Y.: Dover, 1997.

                                                              33
Porter, David. Journal of a Cruise. 1815. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1986.
Samuels, Samuel. From the Forecastle to the Cabin. 1887. London: Macdonald and Jane's, 1974.
Semmes, Raphael. Memoirs of Service Afloat. 1869. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University
Press, 1996.
2.8 Possible answers to self-assessment exercise no 1. The evolution of maritime Law is in
three stages, the ancient, the Middle Ages and the modern time.

Unit 3: The Legal Framework of International Maritime Law
3.1 Introduction
Sources of law are the origins of laws, the binding rules that enable any state to govern its territory.
The term source of law may sometimes refer to the sovereign or to the seat of power from which
the law derives its validity. The perceived authenticity of a source of law may rely on a choice of
jurisprudence analysis. Tyrants such as Kim Jong-un may wield De facto power, but critics would
say he does not exercise power from a de jure or legitimate source. After World War II it was not
a valid defence at Nuremberg to say "I was only obeying orders", and the victors hanged Nazis for
breaching universal and eternal standards of right and wrong.
Over decades and centuries, principles of law have been derived from customs. The divine right
of kings, natural and legal rights, human rights, civil rights, and common law are early unwritten
sources of law. Canon law and other forms of religious law form the basis for law derived from
religious practices and doctrines or from sacred texts; this source of law is important where there
is a state religion. Historical or judicial precedent and case law can modify or even create a source

                                                              34
of law. Legislation, rules, and regulations are form the tangible source of laws which are codified
and enforceable.

i. Traditional international law sources. The traditional starting point of discussion on the
sources of international law is Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice. To the
extent that it speaks to the law to be administered to disputes at bar between sovereign States,
Article 38 refers to four sources, three of which are considered in this article. First are international
conventions expressly recognized by States. These constitute the bulk of international maritime
law. In order for the provisions of an international treaty to have direct force of law in a coastal,
it is necessary for that instrument to be transformed, i.e., legislated into domestic law. The
requirement of express recognition in Article 38 makes it unclear whether international
instruments, to which a state is not a party, but which have been legislated or whose underlying
values are recognized by a State court as reflecting State values, constitute a source of international
law.
Second, there is international custom as evidence of a general practice accepted as law. By
definition international custom is unwritten law, and it may or may not be codified, although
frequently the evidence of the existence of a custom may be written. Unlike conventions, custom
does not require express sovereign State consent for its emergence and eventual binding authority.
This has significance for how Canadian courts notice custom as a source of international law, as
will be seen below. States are bound by customary law irrespective of whether they are parties to
conventions in which it is codified. Much maritime law has customary origins, and despite
extensive codification and further development, as will be seen below, uncodified custom remains.
The customary law-making process is ongoing: old customs evolve and new norms emerge
through the combined force of State practice and opinio juris.
Third, general principles of law recognized by States are also a source, but are not addressed in
this article. Finally, Article 38 includes as a secondary source, subject to the provisions of Article
59, judicial decisions and the teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various
nations, as subsidiary means for the determination of rules of law. In so far as
Canadian judicial decisions are concerned, Justice La Forest underlined the role of the Supreme
Court of Canada's judgments in contributing to the further development of international law and
in assisting other jurisdictions.

                                                              35
ii. International maritime "soft law" and industry practices In addition to traditional sources of
international law, international and domestic lawmakers and industry also look to alternative
sources for guidance of State and industry practice with respect to navigation and shipping. These
sources can be described in part as international maritime soft law and in other respects as maritime
industry practices. First, the International Maritime Organization adopts resolutions, codes and
guidelines of a voluntary character which do not necessarily relate to obligations under any of the
conventions for which it has secretariat responsibilities, although many are related in some way.
These instruments are designed to assist member States with the implementation of a particular
convention or to assist with a specific issue not yet subject to an international rule or standard. An
example of this is the IMO Guidelines on Places of Refuge for Ships in Need of Assistance, which
provide a voluntary framework for decision-making by coastal State authorities and ship-owners,
masters, and salvors. The philosophy behind this instrument is to promote clarity and uniformity
in risk assessment-based decision-making without creating new international legal obligations.
Although not intended to be mandatory, several States, including Canada, have incorporated the
guidelines within their domestic practice, but without necessarily legislating them. Professor
Kindred has proposed that a principled approach to curial notice of international instruments
should also include consideration of "soft law" sources of international law.

3.2 Learning outcomes

It is intended that at the end of this unit you should be able to:

         i.List the various sources of International Law

         ii. You will be able to distinguish International sources and domestic sources

         iii. You will have a deeper knowledge of the sources of International maritime Law.

3.3 Sources of International Maritime Law

Since there is no world government, there is no world Congress or parliament to make international
law the way domestic legislatures create laws for one country. As such, there can be significant
difficulty in establishing exactly what international law is. Various sources, however principally

                                                              36
treaties between states are considered authoritative statements of international law. Treaties are the
strongest and most binding type because they represent consensual agreements between the
countries who sign them. At the same time, as stated in the statute of the International Court of
Justice, rules of international law can be found in customary state practice, general principles of
law common to many countries, domestic judicial decisions, and the legal scholarship. It is created
by several sources. For example, The Charter of the United Nations is the establishing document
for the International Court of Justice as the principal judicial organ of the United Nations.

Article 38(1) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice lists the sources that the ICJ uses
to resolve disputes as follows:

i. Treaties. Treaties are similar to contracts between countries; promises between States are
exchanged, finalized in writing, and signed. States may debate the interpretation or implementation
of a treaty, but the written provisions of a treaty are binding. Treaties can address any number of
fields, such as trade relations, such as the North American Free Trade Agreement, or control of
nuclear weapons, such as the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty. They can be either bilateral ie
between two countries or multilateral between many countries. They can have their own rules for
enforcement, such as arbitration, or refer enforcement concerns to another agency, such as the
International Court of Justice. The rules concerning how to decide disputes relating to treaties are
even found in a treaty themselves the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties 1969.

International treaties are contracts signed between states. They are legally binding and impose
mutual obligations on the states that are party to any particular treaty states parties. The main
particularity of human rights treaties is that they impose obligations on states about the manner in
which they treat all individuals within their jurisdiction. Even though the sources of international
law are not hierarchical, treaties have some degree of primacy. More than forty major international
conventions for the protection of human rights have been adopted. International human rights
treaties bear various titles, including `covenant', `convention' and `protocol'; but what they share
are the explicit indication of states parties to be bound by their terms.

ii. International Custom: Article 38(1)(b) of the ICJ Statute refers to international custom as a
source of international law, specifically emphasizing the two requirements of state practice plus

                                                              37
acceptance of the practice as obligatory or opinio juris sive necessitatis usually abbreviated as
opinio juris. Derived from the consistent practice of originally Western states accompanied by
opinio juris the conviction of States that the consistent practice is required by a legal obligation,
customary international law is differentiated from acts of comity mutual recognition of
government acts by the presence of opinio juris although in some instances, acts of comity have
developed into customary international law, i.e. diplomatic immunity. Treaties have gradually
displaced much customary international law. This development is similar to the replacement of
customary or common law by codified law in municipal legal settings, but customary international
law continues to play a significant role in international law.

iii. General principles of Law

The scope of general principles of law, to which Article 38(1) of the Statute of the ICJ refers, is
unclear and controversial but may include such legal principles that are common to a large number
of systems of municipal law. Given the limits of treaties or custom as sources of international law,
Article 38(1) may be looked upon as a directive to the Court to fill any gap in the law and prevent
a nonliquet by reference to the general principles.

In the application of both national and international law, general or guiding principles are used. In
international law they have been defined as `logical propositions resulting from judicial reasoning
on the basis of existing pieces of international law'. At the international level, general principles
of law occupy an important place in case-law regarding human rights. A clear example is the
principle of proportionality, which is important for human rights supervisory mechanisms in
assessing whether interference with a human right may be justified.

iv. Judicial decisions.
According to Article 38(1) (d) of its Statute, the ICJ is also to apply judicial decisions and the
teachings of the most highly qualified publicists of the various nations, as subsidiary means for the
determination of rules of law. It is difficult to tell what influence these materials have on the
development of the law. Pleadings in cases before the ICJ are often replete with references to case
law and to legal literature.

                                                              38
iv. The writing of Scholars
The writings of scholars contribute to the development and analysis of International Maritime law.
Compared to the formal standard setting of international organs the impact is indirect.
Nevertheless, influential contributions have been made by scholars and experts working in human
rights fora, for instance, in the UN Sub-Commission on the Promotion and Protection of Human
Rights, as well as by highly regarded NGOs, such as Amnesty International and the International
Commission of Jurists. Legal scholarship is not really authoritative in itself, but may describe rules
of law that are widely followed around the world. Thus, articles and books written by law Erudite
professors in the area of International Maritime Law can be consulted to find out what international
Maritime law is,

v. General practice of International Organization is a source of International maritime Law

Some instruments or decisions of political organs of international organizations and human rights
supervisory bodies, although they are not binding on states parties per se, nonetheless carry
considerable legal weight. Numerous international organs make decisions that concern human
rights and thereby strengthen the body of international human rights standards. Such nonbinding
human rights instruments are called `soft law', and may shape the practice of states, as well as
establish and reflect agreement of states and experts on the interpretation of certain
standards. Decisions of political organs of the United Nations or major organizations involving
political obligations play a special role and can have an impact on human rights standard setting,
e.g., certain documents of the Organisation on Security and Co-operation in Europe Conference
on Security and Co-operation in Europe until 1995.

The above sources of International Law are applicable to international Maritime Law. However,
there are international conventions, treaties, Rules and International standards as a source of Legal
instruments dedicated to international Maritime Law.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE : State the Sources of International Maritime from
 the perspective of public international law

3.4 Key International Maritime Organization Conventions

                                                              39
i.International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (SOLAS), 1974, as amended

ii. International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships, 1973, as modified by the
Protocol of 1978 relating thereto and by the Protocol of 1997 (MARPOL1973/78)

    iii. International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watch keeping
             for Seafarers ( STCW) as amended, including the 1995 and 2010 Manila Amendments

3.5 Other conventions relating to maritime safety and security and ship/port interface

    i. Convention on the International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea
             (COLREG), 1972

ii. Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic (FAL), 1965

    iii. International Convention on Maritime Search and Rescue (SAR), 197
    iv. International Convention for Safe Containers (CSC), 1972
    v. International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification and Watchkeeping for

             Fishing Vessel Personnel (STCW-F), 1995.
               2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: List the sources of International maritime
               law provided by International Maritime Organisation (IMO)

3.6 Summary
In this unit you are to learn various sources of maritime law as provided under article 38 [1] of the
Statute of the ICJ. Such as: Treaties, Customary International Law, Principles of International Law,
Writings of Publicists, Judicial Decisions and Non-Legally Binding Instruments. You have also
learned International Maritime Organization key maritime conventions and treaties dedicated to
regulate maritime activities.

In civil law systems, the sources of law include the legal codes, such as the civil code or the
criminal code, and custom in common law systems there are also several sources that combine to
form the law. Civil law systems often absorb ideas from the common law and vice-versa. Scotland,

                                                              40
for instance, has a hybrid form of law, as does South Africa, whose law in an amalgam of common
law, civil law and tribal law.

A state may comply with international law, it may have a written or federal constitution, or it may
have regional legislature, but normally it is the central national legislature that is the ultimate
source of law. While a written constitution may seem to be the prime source of law, the state
legislature may amend its constitution provided certain rules are followed. International law may
take precedence over national law, but international law is mainly made up of conventions and
treaties that have been ratified; and anything that can be ratified may be denounced later by the
national parliament. Although local authorities may feel that they have a democratic mandate to
pass bye-laws, the legislative power they wield has been delegated by parliament; and what
parliament gives, parliament make later take away. In England, the archetypal common law
country, there is a hierarchy of sources,

Since time immemorial, states and peoples have entered into formal relationships with each other.
Over the ages, traditions have developed on how such relationships are conducted. These are the
traditions that make up modern `international law'. Like domestic law, international law covers a
wide range of subjects such as security, diplomatic relations, trade, culture and human rights, but
it differs from domestic legal systems in a number of important ways. In international law there is
no single legislature, nor is there a single enforcing institution. Consequently, international law
can only be established with the consent of states and is primarily dependent on self-enforcement
by those same states. In cases of non-compliance there is no supra-national institution;
enforcement can only take place by means of individual or collective actions of other states. This
consent, from which the rules of international law are derived, may be expressed in various ways.
The obvious mode is an explicit treaty, imposing obligations on the states parties. Such `treaty
law' constitutes a dominant part of modern international law. Besides treaties, other documents
and agreements serve as guidelines for the behaviour of states, although they may not be legally
binding. Consent may also be inferred from established and consistent practice of states in
conducting their relationships with each other. The sources of international law are many and states
commit to them to different degrees. The internationally accepted classification of sources of
international law is formulated in Article 38 of the Statute of the International Court of Justice.

                                                              41
 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: List the sources of International Maritime Law as
 provided by IMO

3.7 References /Further Reading/Web Resources

D. J Harris , Cases and Materials on International Law

Louis N. Mbanefo,Esq, SAN Maritime law and Admiralty Jurisdiction in Nigeria"

Halsbury Laws of England 4th Edition

The New law of the sea and the Nigerian Maritime Sector, issues and prospects for the next
millennium (1998) Nigerian Institute of advanced legal studies. Essays on Nigerian shipping law
by Louis Mbanefo, Sir. Publisher: Lagos, Nigeria: Professional Books, 2006.

Martins F O Ikhilae `Nigeria maritime industry in perspective' Publisher: Nigeria: Delink
Ultimate Ventures, 2003.

 David Lucas ; Shipping & international trade law: jurisdictional comparisons,;
Publisher: London: Sweet & Maxwell, 2014.

Nigerian shipping laws by Louis Nnamdi Mbanefo; Nigeria. Publisher: Abingdon: Professional
Books, 1983.

The kernel concept of shipping operations, policies and strategies: the industry overview by
Obed Ndikom Publisher: [Nigeria?]: Bunmico, 2006.

Susan Hodges and Christopher Hill; Principles of maritime law, London 2001
John G. O'Connor (2011-10-28). "Admiralty Jurisdiction and Canadian Maritime Law in the
Federal Courts: The next forty years" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-05-25.
Christopher J. Giaschi (2000-10-03). "The Constitutional implications of Ordon v. Grail and the
expanding definition of Canadian maritime law". Archived from the original on 2011-03-19.
Retrieved 2012-01-10.
Joseph R. Oliveri (2008). "Converse-Erie: The Key to Federalism in an Increasingly
Administrative State" (essay). Archived June 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine

Robinson, Gustavus H. (1939). Handbook of Admiralty Law in the United States. Hornbook
Series. St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co.

                                                              42
 3.8 Possible Answers to self-assessment exercise no 1.; Article 38(1) ICJ Statutes provided
 6 sources of International maritime Law. These are:

Sources of international law includes treaties, international customs, general widely recognized
principles of law, the decisions of national and lower courts, and scholarly writings. They are the
materials and processes out of which the rules and principles regulating the international
community are developed.

Unit 4  Principles and Components of International Maritime Law

4.1 Introduction

A principle is a proposition or value that is a guide for behavior or evaluation. In law, it is a rule
that has to be or usually is to be followed, or can be desirably followed, or is an inevitable
consequence of something, such as the laws observed in nature or the way that a system is
constructed. The principles of such a system are understood by its users as the essential
characteristics of the system, or reflecting system's designed purpose, and the effective operation
or use of which would be impossible if any one of the principles was to be ignored. A system may
be explicitly based on and implemented from a document of principles as was done in IBM's
360/370 Principles of Operation. In common English, it is a substantive and collective term
referring to rule governance, the absence of which, being "unprincipled", is considered a character

                                                              43
defect. It may also be used to declare that a reality has diverged from some ideal or norm as when
something is said to be true only "in principle" but not in fact. It represents a set of values that
inspire the written norms that organize the life of a society submitting to the powers of an authority,
generally the State. The law establishes a legal obligation, in a coercive way; it therefore acts as
principle conditioning of the action that limits the liberty of the individuals. See, for examples, the
territorial principle, homestead principle, and precautionary principle.

A component represents one or more logical tasks. For example consider a car. It can be considered
as a component since it allows people to sit, which can be considered an input. It transports a
person from one place to another, which is its function. It requires a certain amount of fuel to
operate and has a certain maximum speed limit, which represent its characteristics. It is composed
of an engine, braking system, air conditioner and other such sub components. Each of these sub
components has their own distinguished functions. The engine takes a certain amount of fuel as
input, performs a process known as internal combustion and produces movement along with
carbon monoxide as outputs. There are also components of maritime law as well.

4.2 Learning Outcomes
It is intended that at the end of this unit you will be able to:

i. Explain the principles guiding the use of the oceans and components of international maritime
law.
ii. Have knowledge of the issue of health care during voyage
iii.The principles of assisting a vessel under distress
iv. Deeper knowledge about injuries.
4.3 Principles of International Maritime Law

i. Maintenance and cure
The doctrine of maintenance and cure is rooted in Article VI of the Rolls of Oleron promulgated
in about 1160 A.D. The obligation to cure requires a shipowner to provide medical care free of
charge to a seaman injured in the service of the ship, until the seaman has reached maximum

                                                              44
medical cure. The concept of maximum medical cure is more extensive than the concept maximum
medical improvement. The obligation to cure a seaman includes the obligation to provide him with
medications and medical devices which improve his ability to function, even if they don't improve
his actual condition. They may include long term treatments that permit him to continue to function
well. Common examples include prostheses, wheelchairs, and pain medications.

The obligation of maintenance requires the shipowner to provide a seaman with his basic living
expenses while he is convalescing. Once a seaman is able to work, he is expected to maintain
himself. Consequently, a seaman can lose his right to maintenance, while the obligation to provide
cure is ongoing. A seaman who is required to sue a shipowner to recover maintenance and cure
may also recover his attorneys fees. Vaughan v. Atkinson, 369 U.S. 527 (1962). If a shipowner's
breach of its obligation to provide maintenance and cure is willful and wanton, the shipowner may
be subject to punitive damages. See Atlantic Sounding Co. v. Townsend, 557 U.S. 404 (2009).

    ii. Personal injuries to passengers

Ship-owners owe a duty of reasonable care to passengers. Consequently, passengers who are
injured aboard ships may bring suit as if they had been injured ashore through the negligence of a
third party. The passenger bears the burden of proving that the ship-owner was negligent. While
personal injury cases must generally be pursued within three years, suits against cruise lines may
need to be brought within one year because of limitations contained in the passenger ticket. Notice
requirements in the ticket may require a formal notice to be brought within six months of the injury.
Most U.S. cruise line passenger tickets also have provisions requiring that suit to be brought in
either Miami or Seattle.

In England, the 1954 case of Adler v Dickson The Himalaya 1954 allowed a shipping line to
escape liability when a bosun's negligence resulted in a passenger being injured. Since then, the
Unfair Contract Terms Act 1977 has made it unlawful to exclude liability for death or personal
injury caused by one's negligence. Since then, however, the so-called "Himalaya clause" has
become a useful way for a contractor to pass on the protection of a limitation clause to his
employees, agents and third-party contractors.

    iii. Maritime liens and mortgages

                                                              45
Banks which loan money to purchase ships, vendors who supply ships with necessaries like fuel
and stores, seamen who are due wages, and many others have a lien against the ship to guarantee
payment. To enforce the lien, the ship must be arrested or seized. In the United States, an action
to enforce a lien against a U.S. ship must be brought in federal court and cannot be done in state
court, except for under the reverse-Erie doctrine whereby state courts can apply federal law.

    iv. Salvage and treasure salvage

When property is lost at sea and rescued by another, the rescuer is entitled to claim a salvage award
on the salvaged property. There is no life salvage. All mariners have a duty to save the lives of
others in peril without expectation of reward. Consequently, salvage law applies only to the saving
of property. There are two types of salvage: contract salvage and pure salvage, which is sometimes
referred to as merit salvage. In contract salvage the owner of the property and salvor enter into a
salvage contract prior to the commencement of salvage operations and the amount that the salvor
is paid is determined by the contract. The most common salvage contract is called a Lloyd's Open
Form Salvage Contract.

In pure salvage, there is no contract between the owner of the goods and the salvor. The
relationship is one which is implied by law. The salvor of property under pure salvage must bring
his claim for salvage in court, which will award salvage based upon the "merit" of the service and
the value of the salvaged property. Pure salvage claims are divided into high-order and low-order
salvage. In high-order salvage, the salvor exposes himself and his crew to the risk of injury and
loss or damage to his equipment to salvage the damaged ship. Examples of high-order salvage are
boarding a sinking ship in heavy weather, boarding a ship which is on fire, raising a ship or boat
which has already sunk, or towing a ship which is in the surf away from the shore. Low-order
salvage occurs where the salvor is exposed to little or no personal risk. Examples of low-order
salvage include towing another vessel in calm seas, supplying a vessel with fuel, or pulling a vessel
off a sand bar. Salvors performing high order salvage receive substantially greater salvage award
than those performing low order salvage.

                                                              46
    v. Piracy

Merchant vessels transiting areas of increased pirate activity i.e. the Gulf of Aden, Somali Basin,
Southern Red Sea and Bab-el-Mandeb straits are advised to implement self-protective measures,
in accordance with most recent best management practices agreed upon by the members of the
merchant industry and endorsed by the NATO Shipping Centre, and the Maritime Security Centre
Horn-of-Africa.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What do you understand by the principles of
 maritime law

4.4 Components of International maritime law

i.Maritime liens

Although admiralty actions are frequently brought in personam, against individual or corporate
defendants only, the most distinctive feature of admiralty practice is the proceeding in rem, against
maritime property, that is, a vessel, a cargo, or freight, which in shipping means the compensation
to which a carrier is entitled for the carriage of cargo. Under American maritime law, the ship is
personified to the extent that it may sometimes be held responsible under circumstances in which
the ship-owner himself is under no liability. The classic example of personification is the
compulsory pilotage case. Some state statutes impose a penalty on a shipowner whose vessel fails
to take a pilot when entering or leaving the waters of the state. Since the pilotage is thus
compulsory, the pilot's negligence is not imputed to the ship-owner. Nevertheless, the vessel itself
is charged with the pilot's fault and is immediately impressed with an inchoate maritime lien that
is enforceable in court.

Maritime liens can arise not only when the personified ship is charged with a maritime tort, such
as a negligent collision or personal injury, but also for salvage services, for general average
contributions, and for breach of certain maritime contracts.

In a proceeding in rem, the vessel, cargo, or freight can be arrested and kept in the custody of the
court unless the owner obtains its release by posting a bond or such other security as may be
required under the applicable law or as may be acceptable to the plaintiff. More frequently,

                                                              47
however, the owner will post security to avoid a threatened arrest, and the property never has to
be taken into custody. When the judgment is for the plaintiff in a proceeding in rem, there will be
a recovery on the bond or other security if the owner of the property does not pay; or, if security
has not been posted, the court will order the property sold, or the freight released, in order to satisfy
the judgment. The sale of a ship by an admiralty court following a judgment in rem divests the
ship of all pre-existing liens and not merely those liens sought to be enforced in the proceeding in
rem. By way of contrast, the holder of an in personam judgment against a shipowner can, like any
judgment creditor, have the ship sold in execution of the judgment; but such a sale, unlike the sale
under an admiralty judgment in rem, does not divest existing liens; the purchaser at the execution
sale takes the ship subject to all such liens. Thus, an in rem proceeding has decided advantages
over a proceeding in personam in a case in which the ship-owner is insolvent.

Efforts have been made from time to time to increase the security value of ship mortgages, in order
to encourage lending institutions to finance vessel construction, but these efforts have not been
very successful, largely because of differences in national laws respecting the relative priorities of
mortgages and maritime liens. Under general maritime law there is a complex hierarchy of
maritime liens; that is to say, in a proceeding that involves distribution of an inadequate fund to a
number of lien claimants, liens of a higher rank will be paid in full in priority over liens of a lower
rank; and in most countries a ship mortgage ranks lower than a number of maritime liens. Attempts
were made to harmonize some of these conflicts by international conventions signed in 1926 and
1976, but the first failed to win widespread support and, as of the end of 1983, the second had been
ratified by only half of the signatories required for the convention to enter into force.

ii. Shipping charters

The function of ships, other than warships, pleasure craft, and service vessels of various types is
of course transportation of cargoes and passengers. In the jet age the passenger-carrying segment
of the shipping industry has lost much of its former importance, but the quantity of goods
transported by water continues to grow as the world economy expands. The great majority of the
contracts governing the carriage of goods by water are evidenced either by charter parties or by
bills of lading. The term charter party a corruption of the Latin carta partita, or divided charter is
employed to describe three widely differing types of contracts relating to the use of vessels owned

                                                              48
or controlled by others. Under a demise or bareboat charter, the ship owner delivers possession of
the vessel to the charterer, who engages the master and crew, arranges for repairs and supplies,
and, in general, functions in much the same way as an owner during the term of the charter. A
much more common arrangement is the "time" charter, where under the ship owner employs the
master and crew and the charterer simply acquires the right, within specified limits, to direct the
movements of the vessel and determine what cargoes are to be carried during the charter period.
Under both demise and time charters, the charterer pays charter hire for the use of the vessel at a
specified daily or monthly rate.

Another type is the voyage charter, which is essentially a contract of affreightment, or carriage.
Most voyage charters provide for the carriage of full cargoes on one voyage or a series of voyages,
but occasionally a charterer contracts for the use of only a portion of the carrying capacity of the
vessel, in which case the governing contract is described as a space charter. Under a voyage
charter, it is customary for the master or his agent to issue a bill of lading to the shipper, who is
usually the charterer, although as between ship-owner and charterer the voyage charter remains
the governing contract of carriage; the bill of lading serves only as a receipt and as a document of
title to the goods. Ocean bills of lading are usually in order form; that is, they call for delivery to
the order of the shipper or of some other designated party. Such a bill of lading may be negotiated
in much the same way as a check, draft, or other negotiable instrument, which means that a bona
fide purchaser of the bill of lading takes it free and clear of any defects not appearing on its face.
Thus, if cargo is externally damaged on shipment but the damage is not noted on the bill of lading,
the carrier will be barred from establishing that the cargo was in fact damaged before it came into
the carrier's custody. Once a bill of lading issued under a voyage charter is negotiated to a bona
fide purchaser, it becomes the governing contract between the carrier and the holder of the bill.

When a ship strands or collides with another vessel, substantial cargo loss or damage may result.
If the casualty is found to have been caused by a sea peril or an error in navigation, there will be
no liability if the goods are being carried under a statutory or contractual provision based upon the
Brussels Convention on Limitation of Liability (1923), which incorporated the so-called "Hague
Rules." If, however, the casualty was the result of the carrier's failure to exercise due diligence to
make the ship seaworthy and to see that it was properly manned, equipped, and supplied, the carrier
will be held responsible.

                                                              49
iii. Marine insurance

An appreciation of the part played by marine insurance is essential to an understanding of the
shipping industry and the special law that governs it. Most ship-owners carry hull insurance on
their ships and protect themselves against claims by third parties by means of protection and
indemnity insurance. Waterborne cargo is almost universally insured against the perils of the seas.
It is impossible in a brief outline such as this to go into any of the special intricacies, which are
many, of marine insurance law. Most cases of damage to a ship or its cargo resolve themselves
into settlements between insurance carriers. Proposals for changes in the maritime law must always
be evaluated against this background of insurance coverage, as the imposition of liabilities that
cannot be insured against can discourage all but the wealthiest ocean carriers from engaging in the
affected trades.

Marine insurance is the oldest known form of insurance. Indeed, the institution of general average,
under which the participants in a maritime venture contribute to losses incurred by some for the
benefit of all, may itself be looked on as a primitive form of mutual insurance. Hull and cargo
insurance today, in fact, is usually written on forms whose wording has changed little since the
18th century. The so-called perils clause, enumerating the risks insured against, customarily
includes not only the natural hazards to which a vessel is exposed but man-made perils such as
capture or destruction by enemy forces as well. In 1898, however, Lloyd's of London underwriters
inaugurated the practice of adding Free of Capture and Seizure clauses to the basic policy forms,
the effect of which was to remove war and similar risks from coverage. The practice has since
become universal, with the result that the owner of a ship or cargo must either purchase separate
war-risk insurance or else pay his marine underwriters an additional premium in return for deletion
of the F.C.&S. clause.

An early type of marine liability insurance was against liability for damage that the insured vessel
caused to other vessels. Such insurance was effected by the addition of a "running down" or
"collision" clause to the basic hull policy insuring the owner or operator of a vessel against its loss
or damage. On the theory that, if given full protection, owners and operators would not be
encouraged to exercise proper care in the maintenance of their vessels and the selection of their

                                                              50
masters and crews, hull underwriters at first refused to insure against more than 75 percent of the
collision liability.

 2. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Describe the components of maritime law you have
 learned.

4.5 International Regulation

Maritime law is often thought of as being a species of international law rather than a branch of
domestic or municipal law. It should not be denied that the international aspect of maritime law
gives it a distinctive flavour; in doubtful cases courts of one country will often look to the
precedents or statutes of another country for inspiration or guidance. Except to the extent that it
may have bound itself by international conventions, however, each country has the right to adopt
such maritime laws as it sees fit. Although many such laws are common to most maritime
countries, others are not, though there is a growing tendency to restore the international uniformity
in the maritime law achieved during the Middle Ages. In many areas, the lead has been taken by
the International Maritime Committee, more commonly known by its French name, Comité
Maritime International which is composed of the maritime law associations of more than 30
nations. The work of the Comité consists principally of drafting international conventions relating
to subjects of maritime law. When such a draft is prepared, it is submitted to the Belgian
government, which then convenes a diplomatic conference at which the CMI draft is discussed
and amended as the official delegates may decide. If the revised draft wins approval at the
conference, it is then submitted to the national governments for possible ratification. Although
many of these conventions have failed to be widely ratified, others have been highly successful.

4.6 Summary
Maritime law is a complete system of law, both public and private, substantive and procedural,
national and international, with its own courts and jurisdiction, which goes back to Rhodian law
of 800 B.C. and pre-dates both the civil and common laws. Its more modern origins were civilian
in nature, as first seen in the Rôles of Oléron of circa 1190 A.D. Maritime law was subsequently
greatly influenced and formed by the English Admiralty Court and then later by the common law

                                                              51
itself. That maritime law is a complete legal system can be seen from its component parts. For
centuries maritime law has had its own law of contract.

Maritime law, is the private law of navigation and shipping and covers inland as well as marine
waters. It is the entire body of laws, rules, legal concepts and procedures that relate to the use of
marine resources, ocean commerce, and navigation. Maritime law was shaped by the practical
needs of those countries bordering the Mediterranean Sea involved in maritime commerce, the
roots of which are traced as far back as 900 B.C. Usually, the need was for legal solutions that had
no application on land, therefore, as medieval codes began to emerge in port cities and states of
Europe, the customs of mariners and merchants played a large part in the development of maritime
laws. These early codes and customary law practices served to shape the current U. S. maritime
law. The contracts, torts, offenses or injuries which are results of involvement in sea navigation or
commerce make up this unique body of law.

The term, admiralty, specifically refers to the British courts in England and the American colonies,
separate courts that traditionally exercised jurisdiction over all regulations and handling of disputes
relating to sea navigation and commerce. The American courts in practice adopted English law
and procedure but chose early on to include national subject matter jurisdiction. The American
colonies after the Revolution provided, through the Judiciary Act of 1789 and Article III 2 of the
U.S. Constitution, exclusive jurisdiction to the federal district courts over admiralty and maritime
matters. The U.S. Congress regulates admiralty through the Commerce Clause and provides
national uniform rules which prevail in admiralty claims in national or international shipping and
commerce. The admiralty courts have limited jurisdiction but have remained a separate entity.
They have expanded to include all activities on both the high seas and navigable waters. Much of
U.S. maritime law has evolved through international maritime law in concert with maritime laws
of other countries. Federal statutes dealing with maritime issues have been customized with a basis
coming from international treaties and resolutions.

In English-speaking countries, admiralty is sometimes used synonymously, but in a strict sense
the term refers to the jurisdiction and procedural law of courts whose origins may be traced to the
office of Admiral. Although etymologically maritime law and "law of the sea" are identical, the
former term is generally applied to private shipping law, whereas the latter, usually prefixed by

                                                              52
"international," has come to signify the maritime segment of public international law. The
Convention on the Law of the Sea, on the other hand, is a UN agreement regarding territorial
waters, sea lanes, and ocean resources. The Convention was originally signed by 119 nations on
Dec. 10, 1982.

In addition maritime law regulates the enforcement of contracts and commonly makes provision
for damages to parties who have suffered some form of loss at the hands of a contracting party that
has failed to honour or perform in accordance with their agreement. Such a contractual clause must
be distinguished from the principle of general average which contemplates the voluntary sacrifice
made by the master of the ship in respect of cargo, equipment or funds in order to mitigate further
losses or damage in an emergency. The loss suffered by parties is thus shared amongst other parties
who have shared in the relevant venture.

  3. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE): Analyse the regulations of International maritime
 law?

4.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

Susan Hodges and Christopher Hill; Principles of maritime law, London 2001
John G. O'Connor (2011-10-28). Admiralty Jurisdiction and Canadian Maritime Law in the
Federal Courts: The next forty years" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-05-25.
Christopher J. Giaschi (2000-10-03). "The Constitutional implications of Ordon v. Grail and the
expanding definition of Canadian maritime law". Archived from the original on 2011-03-19.
Retrieved 2012-01-10.
Joseph R. Oliveri (2008). Converse-Erie: The Key to Federalism in an Increasingly
Administrative State". Archived June 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine

Robinson, Gustavus H. (1939). Handbook of Admiralty Law in the United States. Hornbook
Series. St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co.
Loyola University New Orleans College of Law Library. Written by Loyola University New
Orleans Law Library.

                                                              53
4.8 Possible Answer to self-assessment exercise no, 2: Maintenance and cure,
salvage and salvage treasure, marine insurance, piracy etc.

Maritime liens
Although admiralty actions are frequently brought in personam, against individual or corporate
defendants only, the most distinctive feature of admiralty practice is the proceeding in rem, against
maritime property, that is, a vessel, a cargo, or "freight," which in shipping means the
compensation to which a carrier is entitled for the carriage of cargo.
Shipping charters
The function of ships, other than warships, pleasure craft, and service vessels of various types is
of course transportation of cargoes and passengers. In the "jet age" the passenger-carrying segment
of the shipping industry has lost much of its former importance, but the quantity of goods
transported by water continues to grow as the world economy expands.
Limitation of liability
A distinctive feature of maritime law is the privilege accorded to a shipowner and certain other
persons (uch as charterers in some instances to limit the amount of their liability, under certain
circumstances, in respect of tort and some contract claims.

MODULE TWO: Division of the Sea into Maritime Zones
UNIT 1: Internal Waters
1.1 Introduction
The rights of coastal States to regulate and exploit areas of the ocean under their jurisdiction are
one the foundations of the Law of the Sea Convention. These rights need to be balanced with the

                                                              54
freedom of navigation and access to resources outside State control and the freedom of the seas.
To demarcate the proverbial rules of the road, the Law of the Sea Convention permits coastal States
to establish several different maritime zones. These zones give coastal States different
jurisdictional rights. In general, a State has more rights in zones near to its coastline than it does
further into the ocean. The main challenges associated with these zones are how variations in
geography affect where zones end and where new zones begin.

1.2 Learning Outcomes
You are expected at the end of this you will to be able to:

         i.Know those waters that constitutes internal waters

         ii. Understand that the ocean is divided into maritime zones.

         iii. Explain the sovereign rights of coastal states over internal waters

         iv.That the seas and oceans are no longer a free.

1.3 Internal Waters
Waters landward of the baseline are defined as internal waters, over which the state has complete
sovereignty: not even innocent passage is allowed without explicit permission from said state.
Lakes and rivers are considered internal waters. All archipelagic waters within the outermost
islands of an archipelagic state such as Indonesia or the Philippines are also considered internal
waters, and are treated the same with the exception that innocent passage through them must be
allowed. However, archipelagic states may designate certain sea lanes through these waters.

Internal Waters include littoral areas such as ports, rivers, inlets and other marine spaces landward
of the baseline (low-water line or mark where the port state has jurisdiction to enforce domestic
regulations. Enforcement measures can be taken for violations of static standards while in port as
well as for violations that occurred within the coastal state's maritime zones and beyond. However,
foreign vessels are not usually held to non-maritime or security port state laws so long as the
activities conducted are not detrimental to the peace and security of the locale.

                                                              55
In the maritime security context, however, a coastal state can prevent Privately Contracted Armed
Security Personnel from entering its ports and internal waters if carriage of weapons is forbidden
in national legislation. Moreover, once entering a port PCASP and the vessel which they are aboard
can be held accountable for other violations that took place at sea if

(a) they in some way impacted the port state or

(b) for other reasons with the permission of the flag state. According to the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea, a nation's internal waters include waters on the side of the
baseline of a nation's territorial waters that is facing toward the land, except in archipelagic states.
It includes waterways such as rivers and canals, and sometimes the water within small bays.

In inland waters, sovereignty of the state is equal to that which it exercises on the mainland. The
coastal state is free to make laws relating to its internal waters, regulate any use, and use any
resource. In the absence of agreements to the contrary, foreign vessels have no right of passage
within internal waters, and this lack of right to innocent passage is the key difference between
internal waters and territorial waters. The archipelagic waters within the outermost islands of
archipelagic states are treated as internal waters with the exception that innocent passage must be
allowed, although the archipelagic state may designate certain sea lanes in these waters.

When a foreign vessel is authorized to enter inland waters, it is subject to the laws of the coastal
state, with one exception: the crew of the ship is subject to the law of the flag state. This extends
to labor conditions as well as to crimes committed on board the ship, even if docked at a port.
Offences committed in the harbor and the crimes committed there by the crew of a foreign vessel
always fall in the jurisdiction of the coastal state. The coastal state can intervene in ship affairs
when the master of the vessel requires intervention of the local authorities, when there is danger
to the peace and security of the coastal state, or to enforce customs rules.

The claim by one state of a waterway as internal waters has led to disputes with other states. For
example, Canada claims a section of the Northwest Passage as part of its internal waters, fully
under Canadian jurisdiction, a claim which has been disputed by the United States and most
maritime nations, which consider them to be an international strait, which means that foreign
vessels have a right of transit passage. See Canadian Internal Waters and Northwest Passage

                                                              56
International waters dispute. The International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, which was formed
in 1994, has the power to settle maritime disputes between party states, although in practice, these
resolutions depend on the willingness of these states to adhere to the rulings.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Describe internal waters of Nigeria

1.4 The Rights of Coastal State Jurisdiction over Foreign Vessels in Internal Waters

In the case of ships proceeding to internal waters or a call at a port. Facility outside internal waters,
the coastal State also has the right to take the necessary steps to prevent any breach of the
conditions to which admission of those ships to internal waters or such a call is subject. The coastal
State may, without discrimination in form or in fact among foreign ships, suspend temporarily in
specified areas of its territorial sea the innocent passage of foreign ships if such suspension is
essential for the protection of its security, including weapons exercises. Such suspension shall take
effect only after having been duly published.

According to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, a nation's internal waters
include waters on the side of the baseline of a nation's territorial waters that is facing toward the
land, except in archipelagic states. It includes waterways such as rivers and canals, and sometimes
the water within small bays.

In inland waters, sovereignty of the state is equal to that which it exercises on the mainland. The
coastal state is free to make laws relating to its internal waters, regulate any use, and use any
resource. In the absence of agreements to the contrary, foreign vessels have no right of passage
within internal waters, and this lack of right to innocent passage is the key difference between
internal waters and territorial waters. The archipelagic waters within the outermost islands of
archipelagic states are treated as internal waters with the exception that innocent passage must be
allowed, although the archipelagic state may designate certain sea lanes in these waters.

When a foreign vessel is authorized to enter inland waters, it is subject to the laws of the coastal
state, with one exception: the crew of the ship is subject to the law of the flag state. This extends
to labor conditions as well as to crimes committed on board the ship, even if docked at a port.
Offences committed in the harbor and the crimes committed there by the crew of a foreign vessel

                                                              57
always fall in the jurisdiction of the coastal state. The coastal state can intervene in ship affairs
when the master of the vessel requires intervention of the local authorities, when there is danger
to the peace and security of the coastal state, or to enforce customs rules.

There are some elements of Coastal State Law that a visiting boat may be expected to comply
with. The most common is for the skipper of the vessel to be required to prove that he or she is
competent to be in command of the vessel. In many countries the national legislation will require
such items including life rafts, flares and lifejackets to be "in date" and where applicable that the
relevant service paperwork is available for inspection. A country may also specify items of
equipment and/or publications that must be carried. Vessels navigating the European inland
waters are generally required to carry a copy of the local rules which may be written in the native
language of the country concerned. It is important to ensure you are aware of all such requirements.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What is the jurisdiction of Coastal state over foreign
 Vessels

1.5 The Rights of Coastal Over Internal Waters

The rights of coastal States to regulate and exploit areas of the ocean under their jurisdiction are
one the foundations of the LOSC. These rights need to be balanced with the freedom of navigation
and access to resources outside State control ­ the freedom of the seas. To demarcate the proverbial
rules of the road, the LOSC permits coastal States to establish several different maritime zones.
These zones give coastal States different jurisdictional rights. In general, a State has more rights
in zones near to its coastline than it does further into the ocean. The main challenges associated
with these zones are how variations in geography affect where zones end and where new zones
begin.

Much like internal waters, coastal States have sovereignty and jurisdiction over the territorial sea.
These rights extend not only on the surface but also to the seabed and subsoil, as well as vertically
to airspace.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What the rights of coastal state over its internal
 waters

                                                              58
1.6 Summary

Today's international law there is a variety of maritime areas in which the coastal State exercises
sovereignty, sovereign rights or jurisdiction to the exclusion of other States. While every maritime
area described in UNCLOS has its own regime consisting of rights and obligations of different
categories of States, the interpretation of the provisions defining the activities to which these rights
and obligations apply may give rise to difficulties. The picture of the different areas and of their
regime in UNCLOS is a static one. Difficulties arise when transformation occurs or may occur and
the picture becomes dynamic. The due regard rule and good faith concepts together with the
possibility of submitting the question to adjudication may be helpful.

A maritime boundary is a conceptual division of the Earth's water surface areas using
physiographic and/or geopolitical criteria. As such, it usually includes areas of exclusive national
rights over mineral and biological resources, encompassing maritime features, limits and zones.
Generally, a maritime boundary is delineated through a particular measure from a jurisdiction's
coastline. Although in some countries the term maritime boundary represent borders of a maritime
nation and are recognized by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, they usually
serve to identify international waters. Maritime boundaries exist in the context of territorial waters,
contiguous zones, and exclusive economic zones; however, the terminology does not encompass
lake or river boundaries, which are considered within the context of land boundaries. Some
maritime boundaries have remained indeterminate despite efforts to clarify them. This is explained
by an array of factors, some of which illustrate regional problems. The delineation of maritime
boundaries has strategic, economic and environmental implications.

The maritime zones recognized under international law include internal waters, the territorial sea,
the contiguous zone, the exclusive economic zone, the continental shelf, the high seas and the
Area. With the exception of the high seas and the Area, each of these maritime zones is measured
from the baseline determined in accordance with customary international law as reflected in the
1982 Law of the Sea Convention. The limits of these zones are officially depicted of nautical
charts. The limits shown on the most recent chart edition takes precedence. For a description of
the various maritime zones, as well as the Three Nautical Mile Line and Natural Resource
Boundary, The boundaries of these maritime zones between coastal nations are established through

                                                              59
international agreements entered into by those nations. For the official description of the maritime
boundaries with other nations contact the law of the sea, 1982.

Waters landward of the baseline are defined as internal waters, over which the state has complete
sovereignty: not even innocent passage is allowed. Lakes and rivers are considered internal waters.
All archipelagic waters within the outermost islands of an archipelagic state such as Indonesia or
the Philippines are also considered internal waters, and are treated the same with the exception that
innocent passage through them must be allowed. However, archipelagic states may designate
certain sea lanes through these waters Internal waters are the waters for example, bays and rivers
on the landward side of the baseline from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. Each
coastal State has full sovereignty over its internal waters as if they were part of its land territory.
The right of innocent passage does not apply in internal waters. Internal waters refer to rivers,
canals, and the water within small bays. Usually internal waters cover all waterways of a country.
Foreign vessels are restricted to make a passage within internal waters. They lack the right to
innocent passage in the internal waters whereas they can exercise this right in the territorial waters.
All states have complete sovereignty over their internal waters. See the case of A.G, Federation
V. A.G, Abia State

 3.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE; What is Internal waters in Maritime Law ?

1.7 Reference/Further Reading/Web Resources
UNCLOS part IV, Archipelagic States". Admiralty and Maritime Law Guide. 10 December 1982.
Retrieved 2008-01-18.
Nathan VanderKlippe ( 2006). "Northwest Passage gets political name change". CanWest News
Service. Archived from the original on April 2, 2016. Retrieved 2008-01-18.
Rob Huebert (Winter 2001). "Climate Change and Canadian Sovereignty in the Northwest
Passage". ISUMA: 86­94. Archived from the original on 2002-01-31. Retrieved 2008-01-13.

Susan Hodges and Christopher Hill; Principles of maritime law, London 2001
John G. O'Connor (2011-10-28). "Admiralty Jurisdiction and Canadian Maritime Law in the
Federal Courts: The next forty years" (PDF). Retrieved 2012-05-25.

                                                              60
Christopher J. Giaschi (2000-10-03). "The Constitutional implications of Ordon v. Grail and the
expanding definition of Canadian maritime law". Archived from the original on 2011-03-19.
Retrieved 2012-01-10.
Joseph R. Oliveri (2008). "Converse-Erie: The Key to Federalism in an Increasingly
Administrative State" (essay). Archived June 13, 2010, at the Wayback Machine
Robinson, Gustavus H. (1939). Handbook of Admiralty Law in the United States. Hornbook
Series. St. Paul, Minnesota: West Publishing Co.
Loyola University New Orleans College of Law Library. Written by Loyola University New
Orleans Law Library.

1.8 Possible Answer to self-assessment exercise:

Internal waters are all the waters that fall landward of the baseline, such as lakes, rivers, and
tidewaters. States have the same sovereign jurisdiction over internal waters as they do over other
territory. There is no right of innocent passage through internal waters.

Unit 2: Territorial Sea
2.1 Introduction
Territorial waters, or a territorial sea, as defined by the 1982 United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea, is a belt of coastal waters extending at most 12 nautical miles; from the baseline
usually the mean low-water mark of a coastal state. The territorial sea is regarded as the sovereign
territory of the state, although foreign ships both military and civilian are allowed innocent passage

                                                              61
through it; this sovereignty also extends to the airspace over and seabed below. Adjustment of
these boundaries is called, in international law, maritime delimitation. The term territorial waters
is also sometimes used informally to describe any area of water over which a state has jurisdiction,
including internal waters, the contiguous zone, the exclusive economic zone and potentially the
continental shelf.

2.2 Learning Outcomes
It is expected that are the end of this unit you will be able to:

    i. Understand what is territorial waters of a coastal state
    ii. To .know the limit of territorial water
    iii. Explain the rights of coastal over territorial water
    iv. Have a deep knowledge of the regime of territorial water

2.3 Territorial Waters of Coastal State

Territorial waters or a territorial sea as defined by the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law
of the Sea, is a belt of coastal waters extending at most 12 nautical miles from the baseline usually
the mean low-water mark of a coastal state. The territorial sea is regarded as the sovereign territory
of the state, although foreign ships civilian are allowed innocent passage through it, or transit
passage for straits; this sovereignty also extends to the airspace over and seabed below. Adjustment
of these boundaries is called, in international law, maritime delimitation. The term territorial
waters is also sometimes used informally to refer to any area of water over which a state has
jurisdiction, including internal waters, the contiguous zone, the exclusive economic zone and
potentially the continental shelf. A state's territorial sea extends up to 12 nautical miles from its
baseline. If this would overlap with another state's territorial sea, the border is taken as the median
point between the states' baselines, unless the states in question agree otherwise. A state can also
choose to claim a smaller territorial sea.

Historically, the concept of territorial waters originated in the controversy over the status of the
sea in the formative period of modern international law in the 17th century. Although the doctrine
that the sea by its nature must be free to all was eventually upheld, most commentators did
recognize that, as a practical matter, a coastal state needed to exercise some jurisdiction in the
waters adjacent to its shores. Two different concepts developed that the area of jurisdiction should

                                                              62
be limited to cannon-shot range, and that the area should be a much greater belt of uniform width
adjacent to the coast and in the late 18th century these concepts coalesced in a compromise view
that proposed a fixed limit of 3 nautical miles. In 1793 the United States adopted three miles for
neutrality purposes, but although many other maritime states during the 19th century came to
recognize the same limit, it never won such universal acceptance as to become an undisputed rule
of international law.

In the course of this historical development, it became settled that the belt of territorial waters,
together with the seabed and subsoil beneath it and the airspace above, is under the sovereignty of
the coastal state. This sovereignty is qualified only by a right of innocent passage that is, peaceful
transit not prejudicial to the good order or security of the coastal state for merchant vessels of other
nations. The right of innocent passage does not apply to submerged submarines or to aircraft, nor
does it include a right to fish. On the width of the belt there has developed no universal agreement
except that every state is entitled to a minimum of three nautical miles. Claims in excess of 12
nautical miles commonly meet widespread opposition from other states, though in the 1960s and
'70s a trend to a 12-nautical-mile limit was evident; among about 40 states taking this view were
China, India, Mexico, Pakistan, Egypt, and the Soviet Union.

In International Law the term territorial waters refers to that part of the ocean immediately adjacent
to the shores of a state and subject to its territorial jurisdiction. The state possesses both the
jurisdictional right to regulate, police, and adjudicate the territorial waters and the proprietary right
to control and exploit natural resources in those waters and exclude others from them. Territorial
waters differ from the high seas, which are common to all nations and are governed by the principle
of freedom of the seas. The high seas are not subject to appropriation by persons or states but are
available to everyone for navigation, exploitation of resources, and other lawful uses. The legal
status of territorial waters also extends to the seabed and subsoil under them and to the airspace
above them. From the eighteenth to the middle of the twentieth century, international law set the
width of territorial waters at one league (three nautical miles), although the practice was never
wholly uniform. The United States established a three-mile territorial limit in 1793. International
law also established the principle that foreign ships are entitled to innocent passage through
territorial waters.

                                                              63
The sovereignty of a State also extends to its territorial sea , but this differs from internal waters
in that it is subject to a right of innocent passage by foreign vessels UNCLOS, article 17. The
normal baseline of the territorial sea is the low water line along the coast as marked on large-scale
charts officially recognised by the coastal State, although it is left to the State itself to select the
tidal criteria. See UNCLOS, article 5

The Coastal State may also have laws and regulations which such vessels must adhere to, to ensure
safe navigation, regulation of maritime traffic, protection of navigational aids, facilities, pipelines,
and cables, conservation and preservation of the environment and the living resources of the sea
including fisheries laws and to prevent against infringement of customs, fiscal, immigration or
sanitary laws and regulations of the Coastal State.

The majority of cruising yachts will not however be regarded as being on a continuous and
expeditious passage as they may be exploring the coastline, perhaps anchoring for lunch and they
may also visit several ports within the Coastal State. These activities bring pleasure boaters under
the jurisdiction of the Coastal State as does launching from a foreign shore and they could then be
required to adhere to all of the Coastal State's legislation, rules and regulations that apply to foreign
flagged boats. This is in addition to any applicable Flag State legislation.

2.4 The Concept of Innocent Passage of Foreign Ships Over Territorial waters

The innocent passage has been codified in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
was adopted in 1982, it is also known as the Law of the Sea Treaty. Its purpose is to establish a
comprehensive set of rules governing the oceans and to replace previous U.N. Conventions on the
Law of the Sea, 1958 which was adopted in 1958 and another in 1960, since these two convention
were believed to be inadequate. The term Innocent Passage is defined under international law
referring to a ship or aircraft's right to enter and pass through another's territory so long as it is not
prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the other state. Under Article 19 of the UNCLOS
III it is defined "Passage is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or
security of the coastal State. Such passage shall take place in conformity with this Convention and
with other rules of international law. The right of innocent passage of foreign ships through the
territorial waters of a coastal state is one of the oldest and most universally recognized rules of
public international law.

                                                              64
 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Describe territorial water of a coastal state

2.4.1 Meaning of Passage of ship under Article 18 of the UNCLOS III.

1. Passage means navigation through the territorial sea for the purpose of:

(a) traversing that sea without entering internal waters or calling at a roadstead or port facility
outside internal waters; or

(b) proceeding to or from internal waters or a call at such roadstead or port facility.

2. Passage shall be continuous and expeditious. However, passage includes stopping and
anchoring, but only in so far as the same are incidental to ordinary navigation or are rendered
necessary by force majeure or distress or for the purpose of rendering assistance to persons, ships
or aircraft in danger or distress.

The right of innocent passage is governed by articles 17 to 32 of the Law of the Sea Convention.
This right constitutes an integral part of the territorial sea regime and is a well-established rule of
international law. However, from the time of its infancy; this rule has been accompanied by a
constant and heated controversy between states, concerning its scope of application, legal effect
and inherent implication. The point causing most of the controversial debate and even international
disputes relates to the innocent passage of warships. Both the 1958 Geneva Convention and the
1982 Law of the Sea Convention contain nearly identical provisions under the same subsection
titles regarding innocent passage.

Passage of a foreign ship shall be considered to be prejudicial to the peace, good order or security
of the coastal State, if in the territorial sea it engages any threat or use of force against the
sovereignty, territorial integrity or political independence of the coastal State, or in any other
manner in violation of the principles of international law embodied in the Charter of the United
Nations; any exercise or practice with weapons of any kind; any act aimed at collecting information
to the prejudice of the defense or security of the coastal State; any act of propaganda aimed at
affecting the defense or security of the coastal State; the launching, landing or taking on board of
any aircraft; the launching, landing or taking on board of any military device; the loading or

                                                              65
unloading of any commodity, currency or person contrary to the customs, fiscal, immigration or
sanitary laws and regulations of the coastal State; any act of willful and serious pollution contrary
to this Convention; any fishing activities; the carrying out of research or survey activities; any act
aimed at interfering with any systems of communication or any other facilities or installations of
the coastal State; any other activity not having a direct bearing on passage.

2.4.2 Innocent passage under international law

Innocent passage is as old as the law of the sea itself and is a normal consequence of freedom of
navigation; the doctrine was elaborated in Article 14 of the convention on the law of the sea 1958,
which emphasized that that the coastal state must not hamper innocent passage and must publicise
any dangers to navigation in territorial sea of which it is aware. Passage is defined as navigation
through the territorial sea for the purpose of crossing that sea without entering internal waters or
of proceeding to or from internal waters. It may include temporary stoppages, but only if they are
incidental to ordinary navigation or necessitated by distress or force majeure. it was practiced by
maritime powers throughout the centuries with such consistency, and was affirmed by Jessup in
1927 that As a general principle, the right of innocent passage requires no supporting argument or
citation of authority; it is firmly established in international law . Innocent passage" must be
interpreted and applied in the light of national law which has been implemented by the coastal
state. Every coastal state can adopt laws regarding the safety of navigation, laying of submarine
cables, resources, fishing, environmental protection, scientific research, prevention of
infringement of customs, fiscal, immigration, or sanitary laws and prevention of pollution as well
as implement sea lanes and traffic separation schemes or suspend temporarily the right of innocent
passage in specified areas of its territorial sea, subject only to the restriction that any such measures
must be in conformity with the Convention and international law relating to "innocent passage .

How one can decide that the passage is innocent or not? Passage is declared to be innocent so long
as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the coastal State. Such passage shall
take place in conformity with this Convention and with other rules of international law . Under
Article 17 of the UNCLOS III Right of Innocent Passage is defined "Subject to this Convention,
ships of all States, whether coastal or land-locked, enjoy the right of innocent passage through the
territorial sea", and Passage is defined under Article 18.

                                                              66
1. Passage means navigation through the territorial sea for the purpose of:

(a) traversing that sea without entering internal waters or calling at a roadstead or port facility
outside internal waters; or

(b) proceeding to or from internal waters or a call at such roadstead or port facility.

2. Passage shall be continuous and expeditious. However, passage includes stopping and
anchoring, but only in so far as the same are incidental to ordinary navigation or are rendered
necessary by force majeure or distress or for the purpose of rendering assistance to persons, ships
or aircraft in danger or distress.

Article 19 defines Innocent Passage "Passage is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the
peace, good order or security of the coastal State." When any foreign ship do not abide by the rules
are considered to be violators' and causes prejudice to the Coastal State Passage of a foreign ship
shall be considered to be prejudicial to the peace, good order or security of the coastal State [9] .
The meaning of "innocent" is a little more difficult to appreciate. The International Court was
faced with the problem in the Corfu Channel case. This case arose from incidents that occurred on
October 22nd 1946, in the Corfu Strait two British destroyers struck mines in Albanian waters and
suffered damage, including serious loss of life. The channel they were following, which was in
Albanian waters, was regarded as safe. An incident had already occurred in these waters on May
15th, 1946: an Albanian battery had fired in the direction of two British cruisers. The United
Kingdom Government had protested, stating that innocent passage through straits is a right
recognized by international law; the Albanian Government had replied that foreign warships and
merchant vessels had no right to pass through Albanian territorial waters without prior
authorization.

The Court clarified a point on which there had been considerable difference of opinion; the Court
held that it was not the character of the ship which was the determining factor, but rather the
character of the passage itself. In the words of the Court, the question to consider is "whether the
manner in which the passage was carried out was consistent with the principle of innocent passage.
The Court was satisfied that the passage was innocent. The evidence showed "that the ships were
not proceeding in combat formation, but in line, one after the other, and that they were not

                                                              67
maneuvering until after the first explosion. With respect to the second passage on November 12
and 13, the United Kingdom government itself recognized that it was not mere innocent passage
the mine clearing operation was carried out against Albania's ex press objection and "under the
protection of an important covering force composed of an aircraft carrier, cruisers and other war
vessels. The 1958 Convention expressed the principle underlying the Corfu Channel decision,
namely that passage is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order or security
of the coastal State. the Corfu Channel judgment can be of considerable assistance in reaching a
decision; whether a particular passage has been proved to be prejudicial to the protected rights of
the coastal state.

It would seem that passage is to be presumed innocent until shown otherwise. This is the view of
Leo Gross who maintains that "the text as adopted clearly puts the burden on the coastal state to
show that the passage itself rather than the passage of a particular ship, its purpose or cargo, was
prejudicial to the stated values of the coastal state. Considering this heavy burden, the coastal state
must be in a position to secure the necessary evidence when an offensive passage does occur.

 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Differentiate passage of ship in one of the article under
 the law of the sea 1982

2.5 The Right of Innocent Passage

The right of innocent passage of foreign ships through the territorial waters of a coastal state is one
of the oldest and most universally recognized rules of public international law. Article 17 of the
Geneva Convention on the Law of the Sea 1958 provided that ships exercising the right of innocent
passage were to comply with the laws and regulations enacted by coastal state, in particular those
relating to transport and navigation. This was developed in article 21(1) of the 1982 Convention,
it provided with several laws and regulations concerning innocent passage as have been dealt
earlier in detail.

Jessup in his book on territorial waters has remarked that, as a general principle, the right of
innocent passage requires no supporting argument or citation of authority; it is firmly established
in international law. Grotius considered the right of innocent passage related to the "most specific
and unimpeachable axiom of the Law of Nations, called a primary rule or first principle, the spirit

                                                              68
of which is self-evident and immutable, to wit: Every nation is free to travel to every other nation
and to trade with it. The right of innocent passage is premised on the general right of freedom of
navigation in international waters. Grotius was disposed to claim this right as an adjunct of the
right to trade.

The very term "innocent passage" implies two prerequisites for its exercise :

(a) that passage be innocent, i.e., not of such a nature as to affect the security or welfare of the
coastal state; and

(b) that passage only may be exercised, to the exclusion of such acts as "hovering" or anchoring
in the territorial seas.

One of the Scholars states that the purpose of this right lies in the fact that the whole world has a
legitimate and necessary interest in being able to use the seas for the purposes of normal
intercourse. Passage is a word of motion, and in its proper use it signifies continuous movement
from one place to another. It does not imply any right to remain at rest on the track or to use it for
any other purpose than that of transit. Innocent passage derogates from the authority and
sovereignty which the coastal state exercises over its territorial seas. Even those disposed to grant
the coastal state full sovereignty over its territorial waters do not claim that its sovereignty is
absolute. The essential question is: to what extent is the right of innocent passage an independent
right, on parity with that of the sovereignty of the coastal state; and to what extent should it be
deemed a subordinate right, perhaps even a grant, of the coastal state? The concept of "innocent
passage seems to be the result of an attempt to reconcile the freedom of ocean navigation with the
theory of territorial waters. Many writers maintain that the coastal state exercises sovereignty; on
the other hand, a minority deny the territorial character of the maritime belt and concede that
littoral states works only in the interest of the safety of the coast, certain powers of control,
jurisdiction, police, etc., but not sovereignty.

There is the classic case in the right of innocent passage and the case concerning Right of Passage
over Indian Territory (Portugal v. India) ; was referred to the Court by an Application filed on 22
December 1955. In that Application, the Government of Portugal stated that its territory in the
Indian Peninsula included two enclaves surrounded by the Territory of India, Dadra and Nagar-

                                                              69
Aveli. It was in respect of the communications between those enclaves and the coastal district of
Daman, and between each other, that the question arose of a right of passage in favour of Portugal
through Indian Territory and of a correlative obligation binding upon India. The Application stated
that in July 1954 the Government of India prevented Portugal from exercising that right of passage
and that Portugal was thus placed in a position in which it became impossible for it to exercise its
rights of sovereignty over the enclaves.

The Court referred to the submissions filed by Portugal which in the first place requested the Court
to adjudge and declare that a right of passage was possessed by Portugal and must be respected by
India; this right was invoked by Portugal only to the extent necessary for the exercise of its
sovereignty over the enclaves, and it was not contended that passage was accompanied by any
immunity and made clear that such passage remained subject to the regulation and control of India,
which must be exercised in good faith, India being under an obligation not to prevent the transit
necessary for the exercise of Portuguese sovereignty.

In its Judgment the Court held that, Portugal had in 1954 a right of passage over intervening Indian
territory between the enclaves of Dadra and Nagar-Aveli and the coastal district of Daman and
between these enclaves, to the extent necessary for the exercise of Portuguese sovereignty over the
enclaves and subject to the regulation and control of India, in respect of private persons, civil of
officials and goods in general, the Court also mentioned that that Portugal did not have right of
passage in respect of armed forces, armed police and arms and ammunition. Most importantly also
pointed out that India had not acted contrary to its obligations resulting from Portugal's right of
passage in respect of private persons, civil officials and goods in general. A right of passage in
respect of private persons, civil officials and goods in general, and not be prejudicial to the peace,
good order or security of the coastal States are considered to be innocent.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What do you understand innocent passage of ship in
 the territorial water of a state

2.5.1 Legal status of territorial waters

                                                              70
The actions of states, whether on a national or an international scale, are based on the principle of
sovereignty. When two or more sovereign subjects of international law meet, questions of
jurisdiction arise, i.e., who has the right and obligation to act. The main purpose of the Convention
is to define and regulate such questions relevant to the sea. A central point in this respect concerns
how far from the coast the influence of a coastal state extends. Technical regulations for drawing the
artificial baseline and extending the territorial sea by a maximum of twelve nautical miles
measured from the baseline Articles 3-16; Passage through the territorial sea Articles 17-32,
including suspension of navigation in certain areas article 25; Safety zones around scientific research
installations. Article 26; (3) Passage through straits Articles 34-45; using the territorial sea of states
bordering the straits. Article 37 (4) Passage through archipelagic waters Article 2, Paragraph 1;
Articles 52-54; (5) Pollution from vessels Articles 194.

 3.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain the legal status of a territorial water
2.6 Summary

Maritime zones are areas of the sea for which international law prescribes spatial limits. While
customary international law recognises only the territorial sea and high seas as maritime zones,
modern international law recognises other maritime zones which reflect the modern uses of the
sea. The various maritime zones recognised under modern international law are clearly delineated
under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, 1982 which regulates the rights and
duties of Coastal States in the zones.

This unit has exposed you what is territorial waters, navigation of war ships and commercial ships.
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 provides a framework for coastal states to
follow when establishing the zones where they may exercise national jurisdiction, by stipulating
where individual sovereign rights of coastal states end and where the collective rights of other
states begin. In the event of a dispute arising, UNCLOS encourages states to cooperate in seeking
equitable solutions but provides (in Article XV) enforceable procedures for dispute settlement.
The zones and associated rights established pursuant to UNCLOS are as follows: The Territorial
Sea Baseline: While technically not a zone, the TSB marks the limit between a coastal state's land
territory and the ocean that lies beyond. There are two types of baseline ­ normal and straight and
coastal states can define their TSB using any combination thereof. Each coastal state must
publicise the location of its TSB on published maritime charts and through publication of its

                                                              71
geographic coordinates. The Territorial Sea. The TS extends seaward from the TSB for up to 12nm.
The coastal state has sovereignty over this zone; however, the right of innocent passage is open to
ships of all state.

The right of innocent passage in the territorial sea entitles foreign ships to navigate through those
waters. Such passage must be continuous and expeditious, but it may include stopping and
anchoring in so far as they are incidental to ordinary navigation or are rendered necessary by force
majeure or distress , art 18. Passage is deemed innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace,
good order or security of the coastal State. The Law of the Sea Convention contains a list of non-
innocent activities, including fishing and acts of willful and serious pollution, article 19. A coastal
State may take whatever steps are necessary to prevent passage that is not innocent article 25, and
can thus exclude such vessels from the territorial sea. Moreover, foreign ships exercising the right
of innocent passage must comply with legislation enacted by the coastal State in conformity with
international law, and the Law of the Sea Convention expressly permits such legislation for
navigational safety, the protection of cables and pipelines, the conservation of the living resources
of the sea, the protection of fisheries, the preservation of the environment and the prevention of
pollution, for marine scientific research and hydrographic surveys, and for the enforcement of
customs, fiscal, immigration and sanitary laws, article 21. Accordingly, although a State cannot
prevent genuinely innocent passage by foreign ships through its territorial sea, it can regulate the
manner in which the right is exercised. But a coastal State is forbidden to hamper innocent passage
article 24.

Innocent Pass Innocent passage is a concept in law of the sea which allows for a vessel to pass
through the territorial waters of another state subject to certain restrictions. The UN Convention
on the Law of the Sea defines innocent passage as Passage is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial
to the peace, good order or security of the coastal State. Such passage shall take place in conformity
with this Convention and with other rules of international law. Continuous and expeditious transit,
through territorial waters or internal waters, en route to or from the high seas· Article 19(1) Passage
is innocent so long as it is not prejudicial to the peace, good order, or security of the coastal State.
Non-innocent passage may be prevented, Submarines must transit on the surface and show their
flag Article 20. No right of over flight. May be temporarily suspended, emerging issues: Hazardous
vessels, Warships Right of innocent passage ­ Prior notification/permission.

                                                              72
2.7 REFERENCES/FURTHER READING/Web Resources
Yoshifumi Takana: The International law of the Sea, Cambridge, University press, UK,2012
Akehurst, Michael B. A Modern Introduction to International Law. 6th ed. Boston: Allen and
Unwin, 1987.
Brierly, James Leslie. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Edited by Humphrey Waldock. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1963.
Brownlie, Ian. Principles of Public International Law. 5th ed. New York: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Butler, William E., ed. International Law and the International System. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 1987.

2.8Possible answer to self-assessment exercise no 2:

Innocent passage is a concept in the law of the sea that allows for a vessel to pass through the
archipelagic and territorial waters of another state, subject to certain restrictions. Innocent passage
shall not be hampered by the coastal State. In particular, the coastal State shall not (a) impose
requirements on foreign ships which have the practical effect of denying or impairing the right of
innocent passage ; or (b) discriminate in form or in fact against the ships of any State or against
ships carrying cargoes to, from or on behalf of any State Art. 24 (1) UN Convention on theLaw of
the Sea.

Unit 3: Contiguous Zone
3.1 Introduction
A contiguous zone which must be claimed and, unlike territorial seas, does not exist automatically
allows coastal states to exercise the control necessary to prevent and punish infringements of
customs, sanitary, fiscal, and immigration regulations within and beyond its territory or territorial
sea.

                                                              73
Pirate radio broadcasting from artificial marine fixtures or anchored ships can be controlled by the
affected coastal nation or other nations wherever that broadcast may originate, whether in the
territorial sea, exclusive economic zone, the continental shelf or even on the high seas. Thus a
coastal nation has total control over its internal waters, slightly less control over territorial waters,
and ostensibly even less control over waters within the contiguous zones. However, it has total
control of economic resources within its exclusive economic zone as well as those on or under its
continental shelf., distances measured in nautical miles are exact legal definitions, while those in
kilometres are approximate conversions that are not stated in any law or treaty. Federal nations,
such as the United States, divide control over certain waters between the federal government and
the individual states.

3.2 Learning Outcomes
At the end of this unit you will be to:

i.Explain the term Contiguous Zone of a Coastal State

ii.You will have a deeper knowledge of contiguous zone

iii.You will know the rights of coastal state over this zone and maritime activities that takes place
in the zone.

3.3 Contiguous Zone
The contiguous zone is a belt of water extending from the outer edge of the territorial sea to up to
24 nautical miles from the baseline, within which a state can exert limited control for the purpose
of preventing or punishing infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and
regulations within its territory or territorial sea. This will typically be 12 nautical miles; wide, but
could be more if a state has chosen to claim a territorial sea of less than 12 nautical miles, or less,
if it would otherwise overlap another state's contiguous zone. However, unlike the territorial sea,
there is no standard rule for resolving such conflicts and the states in question must negotiate their
own compromise. The United States invoked a contiguous zone out to 24 metres.

Each coastal State may claim a contiguous zone adjacent to and beyond its territorial sea that
extends seaward up to 24 nm from its baselines. In its contiguous zone, a coastal State may exercise

                                                              74
the control necessary to prevent the infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary
laws and regulations within its territory or territorial sea, and punish infringement of those laws
and regulations committed within its territory or territorial sea. Additionally, in order to control
trafficking in archaeological and historical objects found at sea, a coastal State may presume that
their removal from the seabed of the contiguous zone without its consent is unlawful. In 1972, the
U.S. proclaimed a contiguous zone extending from 3 to 12 miles offshore department of state
public notice 358, 37, consistent with the 1958 UN Convention on the Territorial Sea and
Contiguous Zone. In 1999, eleven years after President Reagan extended the U.S. territorial sea to
12 miles, President Clinton proclaimed a contiguous zone extending from 12 to 24 nm offshore
Presidential Proclamation No. 7219, August 2, 1999, consistent with article 33 of the Law of the
Sea Convention. Contiguous Zone 12 - 24 nm Overlays EEZ Foreign aircraft have over flight
rights Foreign vessels have full navigational, fishing and marine scientific research rights so long
as they are not infringing customs, fiscal, immigration and sanitation laws and assuming no EEZ
declared for the latter rights. Extends territorial sea enforcement Article 33: (a) prevent
infringement of its customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary laws and regulations within its territory
or territorial sea.

The Contiguous Zone is an intermediary zone between the territorial sea and the high seas
extending enforcement jurisdiction of the coastal state to a maximum of 24 nautical miles from
baselines for the purposes of preventing or punishing violations of customs, fiscal, immigration
or sanitary (and thus residual national security) legislation. In the maritime security context, this
can certainly include monitoring any activities which can result in armed violence or weapons
import into the state. Therefore the coastal state can take measures to prevent or regulate armed
maritime security activities out to 24 nautical miles under the reasoning that it is undertaking
customs enforcement operations to prevent movement of arms into its waters/ports.

Ships and aircraft also have obligations. According to UNCLOS Article 39 (1), ships engaged in
transit passage must proceed without delay; refrain from activities other than those incident to their
normal modes of continuous and expeditious transit, unless rendered necessary by force majeure;
refrain from any threat or use of force against the sovereignty, territorial integrity, or political
independence of states bordering the strait; and refrain from acting otherwise in violation of the
principles of international law embodied in the Charter of the United Nations.

                                                              75
 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain the nature and length of a contiguous zone

3.4 Activities within a contiguous Zone

States may also establish a contiguous zone from the outer edge of the territorial seas to a
maximum of 24 nautical miles from the baseline. This zone exists to bolster a State's law
enforcement capacity and prevent criminals from fleeing the territorial sea. Within the contiguous
zone, a State has the right to both prevent and punish infringement of fiscal, immigration, sanitary,
and customs laws within its territory and territorial sea. Unlike the territorial sea, the contiguous
zone only gives jurisdiction to a State on the ocean's surface and floor. It does not provide air and
space rights.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: State the activities that takes place in a contiguous
 zone

3.5 The rights of coastal state over contiguous zone

Within the contiguous zone, a State has the right to both prevent and punish infringement of fiscal,
immigration, sanitary, and customs laws within its territory and territorial sea. Unlike the territorial
sea, the contiguous zone only gives jurisdiction to a State on the ocean's surface and floor.

3.6 Summary

This unit has exposed you to what is contiguous zone and threat to coastal state may take necessary
measures to protect its territorial waters and its citizens. The Contiguous Zone is an intermediary
zone between the territorial sea and the high seas extending enforcement jurisdiction of the coastal
state to a maximum of 24 nautical miles from baselines for the purposes of preventing or punishing
violations of customs, fiscal, immigration or sanitary and thus residual national security legislation.
In the maritime security context, this can certainly include monitoring any activities which can
result in armed violence or weapons import into the state. Therefore the coastal state can take
measures to prevent or regulate armed maritime security activities out to 24 nautical miles under

                                                              76
the reasoning that it is undertaking customs enforcement operations to prevent movement of arms
into its waters/ports.

States may also establish a contiguous zone from the outer edge of the territorial seas to a
maximum of 24 nautical miles from the baseline. This zone exists to bolster a State's law
enforcement capacity and prevent criminals from fleeing the territorial sea. Within the contiguous
zone, a State has the right to both prevent and punish infringement of fiscal, immigration, sanitary,
and customs laws within its territory and territorial sea. Unlike the territorial sea, the contiguous
zone only gives jurisdiction to a State on the ocean's surface and floor. It does not provide air and
space rights.

 3. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What is the legal status of contiguous zone in
 maritime Law?

3.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, opened for signature Dec. 10, 1982, 21 I.L.M.
1261, 1833 U.N.T.S. 397 (entered into force Nov. 16, 1994) [hereinafter UNCLOS].
U.S. Energy Information Administration, World Oil Transit Chokepoints (Dec. 30, 2011),
Corfu Channel (U.K. v. Alb.) 1949 I.C.J. 244 (Dec. 15).

Yoshifumi Takana: The International law of the Sea, Cambridge, University press, UK,2012
Akehurst, Michael B. A Modern Introduction to International Law. 6th ed. Boston: Allen and
Unwin, 1987.
Brierly, James Leslie. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Edited by Humphrey Waldock. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1963.
Brownlie, Ian. Principles of Public International Law. 5th ed. New York: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Butler, William E: International Law and the International System. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 1987.
3.8 Possible Answers to self-assessment exercise no 1:
A zone contiguous to a territorial sea of a coastal State, which may not extend beyond 24 nautical
miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. The contiguous

                                                              77
zone is a belt of sea contiguous to but beyond the territorial sea where the Coastal. State may
exercise enforcement jurisdiction to prevent and punish infringement of its customs, fiscal,
immigration and sanitary laws and regulations within its territory or territorial sea.

Unit 4: Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)
4.1 Introduction
The idea of allotting nations Exclusive Economic Zones to give them more control of maritime
affairs outside territorial limits gained acceptance in the late 20th century. Initially, a country's
sovereign territorial waters extended 3 nmi range of cannon shot beyond the shore. In modern
times, a country's sovereign territorial waters extend to 12 nmi which is beyond the shore. One of
the first assertions of exclusive jurisdiction beyond the traditional territorial seas was made by the

                                                              78
United States in the Truman Proclamation of 28 September 1945. However, it was Chile and Peru
respectively that first claimed maritime zones of 200 nautical miles with the Presidential
Declaration Concerning Continental Shelf of 23 June 1947 El Mercurio, Santiago de Chile, 29
June 1947 and Presidential Decree No. 781 of 1 August 1947. It was not until 1982 with the UN
Convention on the Law of the Sea that the 200 nautical mile exclusive economic zone was formally
adopted.

An exclusive economic zone is a sea zone prescribed by the United Nations Convention on the
Law of the Sea over which state has special rights over the exploration and use of marine resources,
including energy production from water and wind. It stretches from the baseline out to 200 nautical
miles from its coast. In colloquial usage, the term may include the continental shelf. The term does
not include either the territorial sea or the continental shelf beyond the 200 n.m. limit. The
difference between the territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone is that the first confers full
sovereignty over the waters, whereas the second is merely a sovereign right which refers to the
coastal state's rights below the surface of the sea. The surface waters, as can be seen in the map,
are international waters.

4.1 Learning Objectives

    At the end of this unit you should be able to

    i.Explain the concept of Exclusive economic zone

    ii.You will have a deeper knowledge of the zone

    iii.You will know the kind of economic activities of the zone

4.3 The Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ)

The concept of the Exclusive Economic Zone is one of the most important pillars of the 1982
Convention on the Law of the Sea. The regime of the exclusive economic zone is perhaps the most
complex and multifaceted in the whole Convention. The accommodation of diverse issues
contributed substantially to the acceptance of the concept and to the Convention as a whole. The
1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea is often referred to as a package. The metaphor is derived
from a decision made during the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea that the
Convention would be adopted in toto, as a package deal. No single issue would be adopted until

                                                              79
all issues were settled. This decision provided an essential mechanism for reconciling the varied
interests of the states participating in the Conference. If a state's interests in one issue were not
fully satisfied, it could look at the whole package and find other issues where its interests were
more fully represented, thereby mitigating the effects of the first. Thus, the Convention became an
elaborately-constructed document built on trade-offs, large and small.

An Exclusive Economic Zone is a sea zone prescribed by the 1982 United Nations Convention on
the Law of the Sea over which a state has special rights regarding the exploration and use of marine
resources, including energy production from water and wind. It stretches from the baseline out to
200 nautical miles (nmi) from its coast. In colloquial usage, the term may include the continental
shelf. The term does not include either the territorial sea or the continental shelf beyond the 200
nmi limit. The difference between the territorial sea and the exclusive economic zone is that the
first confers full sovereignty over the waters, whereas the second is merely a sovereign right which
refers to the coastal state's rights below the surface of the sea. The surface waters, as can be seen
in the map, are international waters.

Generally, a state's exclusive economic zone is an area beyond and adjacent to the territorial sea,
extending seaward to a distance of no more than 200 nmi out from its coastal baseline. The
exception to this rule occurs when exclusive economic zones would overlap; that is, state coastal
baselines are less than 400 nmi apart. When an overlap occurs, it is up to the states to delineate the
actual maritime boundary. Generally, any point within an overlapping area defaults to the nearest
state.

A state's exclusive economic zone starts at the seaward edge of its territorial sea and extends
outward to a distance of 200 nmi from the baseline. The exclusive economic zone stretches much
further into sea than the territorial waters, which end at 12 nmi from the coastal baseline if
following the rules set out in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Thus, the exclusive
economic zones includes the contiguous zone. States also have rights to the seabed of what is
called the continental shelf up to 350 nmi from the coastal baseline, beyond the exclusive
economic zones, but such areas are not part of their exclusive economic zones. The legal definition
of the continental shelf does not directly correspond to the geological meaning of the term, as it

                                                              80
also includes the continental rise and slope, and the entire seabed within the exclusive economic
zone.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Analyse an Exclusive Economic Zone

4.4 Disputes over the Exclusive Economic Zone

The exact extent of exclusive economic zones is a common source of conflicts between states over
marine waters.

--Norway and Russia dispute both territorial sea and EEZ with regard to the Svalbard archipelago
as it affects Russia's EEZ due to its unique treaty status. A treaty was agreed in principle in April
2010 between the two states and subsequently ratified, resolving this demarcation dispute. The
agreement was signed in Murmansk on 15 September 2010.

--The South China Sea (and the Spratly Islands) is the site of an ongoing dispute between several
neighboring nations.

--Croatia's ZERP (Ecological and Fisheries Protection Zone) in the Adriatic Sea caused friction
with Italy and Slovenia, and caused problems during Croatia's accession to the European Union.

--A wedge-shaped section of the Beaufort Sea is disputed between Canada and the United States,
as the area reportedly contains substantial oil reserves.

--France claims a portion of Canada's EEZ for Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon based on a new definition
of the continental shelf and EEZ between the two countries. Saint-Pierre-et-Miquelon is entirely
surrounded by Canada's EEZ.

--Mauritius claims EEZ for Tromelin from France and EEZ for British Indian Ocean Territory
from the UK.

--Turkey claims a portion of Cyprus's EEZ based on Turkey's definition that no islands, including
Cyprus, can have full EEZ and should only be entitled to a 12 nautical mile reduced EEZ rather
than the usual 200 that Turkey and every other country are entitled to, including an area to the

                                                              81
south of Cyprus containing an offshore gas field. Furthermore, the internationally unrecognized
Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus, which was created as result of the Turkish Invasion of
Cyprus, also claims portions of Cypriot EEZ. The Republic of Cyprus, intergovernmental
organizations and other countries, such the European Union, the United States, Russia, Israel,
Switzerland, Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Armenia do not acknowledge the Turkish claims on Cyprus's
land and sea, and urge Turkey to restrain itself from illegal drilling for gas in the island's EEZ.
Furthermore, EU has threatened Turkey with economic and political sanctions for violating the
Cypriot EEZ.

4.5 Continental shelf

The term "continental shelf" is used by geologists generally to mean that part of the continental
margin which is between the shoreline and the shelf break or, where there is no noticeable slope,
between the shoreline and the point where the depth of the superjacent water is approximately
between 100 and 200 metres. A continental shelf is the edge of a continent that lies under the
ocean. Continents are the seven main divisions of land on Earth. A continental shelf extends from
the coastline of a continent to a drop-off point called the shelf break.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: List five cases that has been adjudicated over the
 EEZone

1.8 Economic activities in EEZ
A zone contiguous to a territorial sea of a coastal State, which may not extend beyond 24 nautical
miles from the baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. Unlike other
zones whose existence derived from earlier international law, the EEZ was a creation of the LOSC.
States may claim an EEZ that extends 200 nautical miles from the baseline. In this zone, a coastal
State has the exclusive right to exploit or conserve any resources found within the water, on the
sea floor, or under the sea floor's subsoil. These resources encompass both living resources, such
as fish, and non-living resources, such as oil and natural gas.4 States also have exclusive rights to
engage in offshore energy generation from the waves, currents, and wind within their EEZ. Article
56 also allows States to establish and use artificial islands, installations and structures, conduct

                                                              82
marine scientific research, and protect and preserve the marine environment through Marine
Protected Areas. Article 58 declares that Articles 88 to 115 of the Convention relating to high seas
rights apply to the EEZ "in so far as they are not incompatible with this Part,

 3. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Mention three economic activities that takes place
 within the exclusive economic zone of Nigeria and USA.

4.6 Summary

The LOSC allows a State to conduct economic activities for a distance of 200 nautical miles from
the baseline, or the continental margin where it extends beyond 200 nautical miles. There are two
methods to determine the extent of a continental margin under the LOSC. The first method is by
measuring geological features using what is called the Gardiner formula. The EEZ is another
intermediary zone, lying between the territorial sea 12 nautical miles and the high seas to the
maximum extent of 200 nautical miles. Although high seas freedoms concerning general
navigation principles remain in place, in this zone the coastal state retains exclusive sovereignty
over exploring, exploiting and conserving all natural resources. The coastal state therefore can take
action to prevent infringement by third parties of its economic assets in this area including, inter
alia, fishing, bio-prospecting and wind-farming. In order to safeguard these rights, the coastal state
may take necessary measures including boarding, inspection, arrest and judicial proceedings, as
may be necessary to ensure compliance with the international laws and regulations.

Unlike other zones whose existence derived from earlier international law, the EEZ was a creation
of the LOSC. States may claim an EEZ that extends 200 nautical miles from the baseline. In this
zone, a coastal State has the exclusive right to exploit or conserve any resources found within the
water, on the sea floor, or under the sea floor's subsoil. These resources encompass both living
resources, such as fish, and non-living resources, such as oil and natural gas. States also have
exclusive rights to engage in offshore energy generation from the waves, currents, and wind within
their EEZ. Article 56 also allows States to establish and use artificial islands, installations and
structures, conduct marine scientific research, and protect and preserve the marine environment
through Marine Protected Areas. Article 58 declares that Articles 88 to 115 of the Convention
relating to high seas rights apply to the EEZ.

                                                              83
The EEZ is the most misunderstood of all the maritime zones by policymakers in States around
the world. Unlike the territorial sea and the contiguous zone, the EEZ only allows for the
previously mentioned resource rights and the law enforcement capacity to protect those rights. It
does not give a coastal State the right to prohibit or limit freedom of navigation or overflight,
subject to very limited exceptions.

4.7 References/Further References
Yoshifumi Takana: The International law of the Sea, Cambridge, University press, UK,2012
Akehurst, Michael B. A Modern Introduction to International Law. 6th ed. Boston: Allen and
Unwin, 1987.
Brierly, James Leslie. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Edited by Humphrey Waldock. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1963.
Brownlie, Ian. Principles of Public International Law. 5th ed. New York: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Butler, William E: International Law and the International System. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 1987.
4.8 Possible Answer to self-assessment exercise no 1 :
The exclusive economic zone is an area where sovereign states have jurisdiction over resources.
The EEZ differs from territorial waters in two respects. First, the jurisdiction of the coastal state
within the EEZ only pertains to natural resources (fish, offshore oil, and gas), while the coastal
state has full jurisdiction within its territorial sea. Second, the maximum width of the territorial sea
is 12 nautical miles from baselines, while the maximum width of the EEZ is 200 nautical miles
(370 km or 230 English miles). Baselines are lines drawn from headland to headland, enclosing
fiords and bays, the maximum length of a straight base line being 24 nautical miles. Nevertheless,
the jurisdiction over sedentary and underground resources is wider than this when the continental
shelf reaches beyond 200 nautical miles. The rules delimiting the continental shelf are rather
technical and are set out in Article 76 of the UN Law of the Sea Convention

                                                              84
MODULE 3: Maritime Activities of the High Sea

Unit 1: The Uses of the High Sea
1.1 Introduction
The High Seas begin where national oversight of the ocean ends. Since they are beyond national
jurisdiction responsibility for coordinating management falls largely to a complex network of
organizations created through international treaties between States with States largely retaining the
responsibility for implementing management responsibilities. As flag-States it's their

                                                              85
responsibility to exercise control over their vessels and citizens. For example, all vessels must fly
the flag of their flag-State or else they may be treated as ships without nationality. The United
Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea entered into force in 1994, has been ratified by most
countries though notably not by the United States of America, and is recognized by most States as
reflecting customary international law of the sea.
1.2 Learning Outcomes
At the end of this unit you will be able to:
i.Define the High seas
ii.You will know the high sea is free for all nations weather land or not
iii.You should be able to understand the uses of the High sea for peaceful purposes and other uses
1.3 The High Sea
Article 2 UNCLOS 1982 provides that the high seas being open to all nations, no State may validly
purport to subject any part of them to its sovereignty. Freedom of the high seas is exercised under
the conditions laid down by these articles and by the other rules of international law. It comprises,

inter alia, both for coastal and non-coastal States:

The high seas are open to all States, whether coastal or land-locked. Freedom of the high seas is
exercised under the conditions laid down by this Convention and by other rules of international
law. It comprises, inter alia, both for coastal and land-locked States:

                                                              86
F. Freedom of navigation;

Freedom of navigation is a principle of customary international law that ships flying the flag of
any sovereign state shall not suffer interference from other states, apart from the exceptions
provided for in international law. In the realm of international law, it has been defined as freedom
of movement for vessels, freedom to enter ports and to make use of plant and docks, to load and
unload goods and to transport goods and passengers. This right is now also codified as Article
87(1) a of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Not all UN member states
have ratified the convention; notably, the United States has signed, but not ratified the convention.
However, the United States enforces the practice.

ii. Freedom of over flight;

The freedom of over flight means that foreign aircraft are granted the right to fly through the EEZ
without any unnecessary delay and shall not carry out activities unrelated to the flyover. Public
international air law is based on two principles. The first recognizes each state's full and absolute
sovereignty over the air above its territory and territorial waters, including the right to impose its
jurisdiction over such airspace. Thus, a state may require any foreign aircraft in its airspace, even
if only briefly in transit, to comply with its air transport regulations, for example, those concerning
the aircraft and its crew, navigation, and the environment. This right, however, is subject to those
international treaty obligations the state has assumed in the interest of safe and efficient air
transport. The Convention on International Civil Aviation (hereinafter referred to as the Chicago
Convention), generally regarded as the Magna Charta of public international air law, requires each
contracting state to collaborate in securing the highest practicable degree of uniformity in
regulations, standards, procedures and organization in relation to aircraft, personnel, airways and
auxiliary services in all matters in which such uniformity will facilitate and improve air navigation.
To this end, the International Civil Aviation Organization was granted the power to adopt
international standards and recommended practices and procedures dealing with matters such as
communication systems and air navigation aids, rules of the air and air traffic control practices, as
well as registration and identification of aircraft. Contracting states, however, retained the right to
depart from such standards or recommended practices, provided they notified the Organization of

                                                              87
the differences between their national regulations and those prescribed by an international
standard.

iii. Freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines;

The freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines, one of the most venerated high seas freedoms
under the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea , faces an uncertain future under
the new international legally binding instrument being negotiated in the United Nations. United
Nations General Assembly Resolution 72/249, authorizing the intergovernmental conference for
the new ILBI, does not expressly mention submarine cables or pipelines but states that the work
and results of the conference should be fully consistent with the provisions of UNCLOS. The
issues in a new ILBI that are likely to have an impact on the freedom to lay submarine cables and
pipelines in areas beyond national jurisdiction are (1) area-based management tools, and (2)
environmental impact assessments, which are mechanisms used to protect and preserve the marine
environment and biodiversit.

iv. Freedom to construct artificial islands and other installations permitted under
international law,

In the high seas all States have the freedom to construct artificial islands and other installations
permitted under international law, subject to Part VI on the continental shelf where it extends
beyond 200 nm. An artificial island or man-made island is an island that has been constructed by
people rather than formed by natural means. Artificial islands may vary in size from small islets
reclaimed solely to support a single pillar of a building or structure, to those that support entire
communities and cities. Early artificial islands included floating structures in still waters, or
wooden or megalithic structures erected in shallow waters. In modern times artificial islands are
usually formed by land reclamation, but some are formed by the incidental isolation of an existing
piece of land during canal construction e.g. Donauinsel, Ko Kret, and much of Door County, or
flooding of valleys resulting in the tops of former knolls getting isolated by water e.g. Barro
Colorado Island. One of the world's largest artificial islands, René-Levasseur Island, was formed
by the flooding of two adjacent reservoirs

v.Freedom of fishing, subject to the conditions laid down.

                                                              88
Article 116 explicitly establishes that the right of States to authorise their nationals to fish on the
high seas is subject to specific limitations. This means that States simply do not have the right to
authorise their nationals to fish on the high seas unless they fulfil the conditions. The high seas are
often characterized as the final and most challenging frontier of fisheries governance. Stock
depletions and rent dissipation persist there despite the recovery of several fish stocks within
exclusive economic zones

Fishing in the high seas was not perceived as a major problem requiring priority attention during
the negotiating process of UNCLOS. Therefore, with respect to the highly migratory and other
fishery resources occurring partly or entirely in the high seas, UNCLOS limited itself to providing
general principles for their conservation, optimum utilization and management, calling upon all
States to cooperate towards the further development and implementation of these general
principles. However, as UNCLOS was being adopted and as more coastal States claimed their
rights and jurisdiction over fisheries in their EEZ, large distant-water fishing fleets were displaced
from some of their traditional coastal fishing grounds and the pressure to fish in the high seas grew
rapidly and without much control. Inadequate management and overfishing soon became problems
in the high seas, and thus the increased need to control and reduce fishing fleets operating on the
high seas as there were indications that excessive fishing was jeopardizing the sustainability of
high seas fishery resources, as was highlighted by FAO 1992 in reporting to the Twentieth Session
of its Committee on Fisheries FAO, 1993

vi. Freedom of scientific research,

Knowledge about the oceans is still very limited and the development of coastal countries often
depends on the potential to exploit their coastal resources. Improving the knowledge and
understanding of marine and coastal processes is a prerequisite for protecting the marine
environment and ecosystems in a more precautionary way and for supporting sustainable economic
opportunities from ocean resources. Results from marine scientific research provide input for
policy makers in pursuing developmental options and also benefit society in terms of weather
forecasting and prevention of natural disasters.

    vi. Freedom of exploitation and exploration of natural resources

                                                              89
UNCLOS recognizes the sovereign rights of the coastal States for the purpose of exploring and
exploiting, conserving and managing fishery resources in their EEZs, calling upon the coastal
States to adopt conservation and management measures to promote the optimum utilization of
fishery resources in their EEZs. With respect to exploited stocks or stocks of associated species
occurring both within the EEZ and in the area beyond and adjacent to the zone, UNCLOS calls
upon the coastal States and States fishing in the high seas to seek agreement upon the measures
necessary for the conservation of those stocks in the adjacent high seas area. UNCLOS also calls
upon the coastal States and other States fishing highly migratory species to cooperate in ensuring
conservation and promoting the optimum utilization of those resources in their whole area of
distribution. With respect to the high seas, UNCLOS also recognizes the free access and the
freedom of fishing to all States, calling upon all States and particularly upon States fishing to
cooperate in the conservation and management of fishery resources occurring in the high seas.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: List four freedom of the High sea

1.4 The rights of all over the High sea

The high seas shall be reserved for peaceful purposes. No State may validly purport to subject any
part of the high seas to its sovereignty. Every State, whether coastal or land-locked, has the right
to sail ships flying its flag on the high seas. In the first paragraph of article 6 of the Convention
1958 of High seas and paragraph 1 of the article 92 of the Convention 1982 stipulated on this issue,
therefore, this international instrument has exceptions including piracy, slave trade, suspected
ships inspection and other unlawful acts and it has provided.

High seas belong to all humanity. As a result it is not under qualification of any government and
is free. International navigation and commerce also with the use of this principle is developing.
This case is of basic importance especially for international commerce and trade. So any
interference and applying prohibition is out of international rules. The owner of that flag state
could stop and investigate every ship and provided that other governments have reasonable reasons
to suspect a ship and those reasons to be in a way that which worth to stop and enter the ship is
feasible. But if it becomes clear after investigation of the ship that it was unreasonable to suspect
the ship, this issue would be pursuable in the international courts or the government which owns

                                                              90
the flag state could retaliate with governmental ships which entered the ship possessing the flag
that is harmful for international sailing totally. The flag state, has exclusive qualifications over the
ship, its cargo and people. But there are some exceptions to the flag state rule. Right of visiting
and searching martial ships in high seas in order to perform rules of international laws when it has
acceptable reasons which a non warship and non-governmental) has committed bellow actions,
could be stopped and investigated.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What are the rights of landlocked and coastal over
 the high sea

1.4.1 International Seabed Authority

International Seabed Authority made up of 167 Member States, and the European Union, the
International Seabed Authority is mandated under the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea to
organize, regulate and control all mineral-related activities in the international seabed area for the
benefit of mankind as a whole. In so doing, ISA has the duty to ensure the effective protection of
the marine environment from harmful effects that may arise from deep-seabed related activities. It
is an intergovernmental body based in Kingston, Jamaica, that was established to organize,
regulate and control all mineral-related activities in the international seabed area beyond the limits
of national jurisdiction, an area underlying most of the world's oceans. It is an organization
established by the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.

1.5.2 Activities of the International Seabed Authority

The Authority's main legislative accomplishment to date has been the adoption, in the year 2000,
of regulations governing exploration for polymetallic nodules. These resources, also called
manganese nodules, contain varying amounts of manganese, cobalt, copper and nickel. They occur
as potato-sized lumps scattered about on the surface of the ocean floor, mainly in the central Pacific
Ocean but with some deposits in the Indian Ocean.

The Council of the Authority began work, in August 2002, on another set of regulations, covering
polymetallic sulfides and cobalt-rich ferromanganese crusts, which are rich sources of such
minerals as copper, iron, zinc, silver and gold, as well as cobalt. The sulphides are found around

                                                              91
volcanic hot springs, especially in the western Pacific Ocean, while the crusts occur on oceanic
ridges and elsewhere at several locations around the world. The Council decided in 2006 to prepare
separate sets of regulations for sulphides and for crusts, with priority given to sulphides. It devoted
most of its sessions in 2007 and 2008 to this task, but several issues remained unresolved. Chief
among these were the definition and configuration of the area to be allocated to contractors for
exploration, the fees to be paid to the Authority and the question of how to deal with any
overlapping claims that might arise. Meanwhile, the Legal and Technical Commission reported
progress on ferromanganese crusts.

1.6 Summary

Freedom of the seas is a principle in the international law and law of the sea. It stresses freedom
to navigate the oceans. It also disapproves of war fought in water. The freedom is to be breached
only in a necessary international agreement. This principle was one of U.S. President Woodrow
Wilson's Fourteen Points proposed during the First World War. In his speech to the Congress, the
president said: Absolute freedom of navigation upon the seas, outside territorial waters, alike in
peace and in war, except as the seas may be closed in whole or in part by international action for
the enforcement of international covenants. The United States' allies Britain and France were
opposed to this point, as France was also a considerable naval power at the time. As with Wilson's
other points, freedom of the seas was rejected by the German government. Today, the concept of
freedom of the seas can be found in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea under
article 87(1) which states: the high seas are open to all states, whether coastal or land-locked.
article 87(1) (a) to (f) gives a non-exhaustive list of freedoms including navigation, over flight, the
laying of submarine cables, building artificial islands, fishing and scientific research.

The high seas are open to all States, whether coastal or land-locked. Freedom of the high seas is
exercised under the conditions laid down by this Convention and by other rules of international
law. It comprises both for coastal and land-locked States: (a) freedom of navigation;,(b) freedom
of overflight;, (c) freedom to lay submarine cables and pipelines, subject to Part VI;, (d) freedom
to construct artificial islands and other installations permitted under international law, subject to
Part VI; (e) freedom of fishing, subject to the conditions laid down in section 2; (f) freedom of
scientific research, subject to Parts VI and XIII.

                                                              92
The doctrine that the high seas in time of peace are open to all nations and may not be subjected
to national sovereignty freedom of the seas was proposed by the Dutch jurist Hugo Grotius as early
as 1609. It did not become an accepted principle of international law, however, until the 19th
century. Freedom of the seas was ideologically connected with other 19th-century freedoms,
particularly laissez-faire economic theory, and was vigorously pressed by the great maritime and
commercial powers, especially Great Britain. Freedom of the high seas is now recognized to
include freedom of navigation, fishing, the laying of submarine cables and pipelines, and over
flight of aircraft. By the second half of the 20th century, demands by some coastal states for
increased security and customs zones, for exclusive offshore-fishing rights, for conservation of
maritime resources, and for exploitation of resources, especially oil, found in continental shelves
caused serious conflicts. The first United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, meeting at
Geneva in 1958, sought to codify the law of the high seas but was unable to resolve many issues,
notably the maximum permissible breadth of the territorial sea subject to national sovereignty. A
second conference Geneva, 1960 also failed to resolve this point; and a third conference began in
Caracas in 1973, later convening in Geneva and New York City.

 3. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What do you understand by the concept of
 `Common Heritage of Mankind' in maritime law?

1.7 Reference/Further Reading/Web Resources
Yoshifumi Takana: The International law of the Sea, Cambridge, University press, UK,2012
Akehurst, Michael B. A Modern Introduction to International Law. 6th ed. Boston: Allen and
Unwin, 1987.
Brierly, James Leslie. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Edited by Humphrey Waldock. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1963.
Brownlie, Ian. Principles of Public International Law. 5th ed. New York: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Butler, William E., ed. International Law and the International System. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 1987.

                                                              93
BROWN, E.D., (1970), "The North Sea Continental Shelf Cases". Current Legal Problems, Vol.
23, pp. 187-215;
BROWNLIE, IAN, (1979), "Principles of Public International Law" Clarendon Press Oxford
(Third Edition).
D'AMATO, (1987) "Trashing Customary International Law" 81 American Journal of International
Law 101 (1987)
1.8 Possible Answer to self-assessment Exercise no 1:

    i. The rights of all over the High sea
    ii. Freedom of exploitation and exploration of natural resources

           iii. Freedom to lay cables
         iv.Freedom of navigation

The high seas are open to all States, whether coastal or land-locked. Freedom of the high seas is
exercised under the conditions laid down by this Convention and by other rules of international
law. The ocean surface and the water column beyond the EEZ are referred to as the high seas in
the LOSC. Seabed beyond a coastal State's EEZs and Continental Shelf claims is known under the
LOSC as the Area. The LOSC states that the Area is considered the common heritage of all
mankind and is beyond any national jurisdiction. States can conduct activities in the Area so long
as they are for peaceful purposes, such as transit, marine science, and undersea exploration.

                                                              94
Unit 2: The Regime of Seaport for Oceangoing Vessels

2.1 Introduction

Ports are the main industrial and commercial tools for economic and social development of the
countries. The port sector is touched by the socioeconomic changes characterized by the
requirements development in the countries, through commitments by the countries of free trade
and the new contexts of globalization, to the new constraints and developments economic,
institutional, technological, environmental and maritime transport development. Therefore, the
seaports have always been disposed to changes in socioeconomic trends. These developments have
created a highly uncertain and complex environment for ports and fundamentally changed the port
concept.

The seaport is a multidimensional system combined between economical function, infrastructure
system, geographical space and trade. In addition, a seaport is managed under a complex legal
concept and managed through an organizational model that mostly generates the need for
convergence of the public and private sectors. The intention of this study is to collect the different
conception of seaport concept and demonstrate that has come about over time and over countries.
In the literature review, some research focused on the port governance or port reforms as Wang
was among the first to consider governance structures in addressing container port systems on a
regional scale. This argument was elaborated in collaborative document flows that followed.

The study of Wang and Slack pointed out that regional forces of redistribution of traffic are
complicated by institutional reforms, as a private terminal operator in the hub port, can have
simultaneous peripheral installation. In addition, for political circles in a region the system may
have spatial concentration or de-concentration effects beyond market forces only. Recently, Wang
and Olivier have shown how the institutional integration of the Chinese port system has diverted
the container-port development from the linear morphology proposed in Any-port. Thus, in
particular, these the authors show how government policies place emphasis on spatial alignment
between new deep water container facilities and special economic zones. Others authors provided
an empirical study about port development as Yip et al, showed the growth of terminal operators
in the context of port management with the application of stochastic frontier model. Liu et al.

                                                              95
analysed the recent development of a port system in the Pearl River Delta, which founded an
evolved system from one stage to another. These two researches showed the important assessment
of the fifth generation port.

The seaport products offer various services, which make each service distinct. There is however a
lack of studies that discuss the seaports concept and its services. Thus, this paper aims to
concentrate on this lack in the literature by presenting and defining the seaport concept and by
examining the different characteristics of its services. Exactly, this paper search the flowing
interrogations: what is a seaport? How it can be defined? Which services seaport can produce?
What are the characteristics of transport services? Who are the customers of port?

2.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit you should be able to:
i. Understand seaports in the chair of carriage of goods by sea.
ii. You know the Role and functions seaports,
iii. You will know the types of sea ports and the regime of seaports.
2.3 Seaports

A port is a maritime facility which may comprise one or more wharves where ships may dock to
load and discharge passengers and cargo. Although usually situated on a sea coast or estuary, some
ports, such as Hamburg, Manchester and Duluth, are many miles inland, with access to the sea via
river or canal. Because of their roles as a port of entry for immigrants many port cities such as
London, New York, Shanghai, Los Angeles, Singapore and Vancouver have experienced dramatic
multi-ethnic and multicultural changes. The definition of port has evolved over time. The evolution
is discovered by fourth generations, which explain that the economic, geographical, technological,
and international trade transformation and container ship fleet development influenced the
meaning of the seaport concept over time. For the first generation, the ports were essentially
interfaces between the land and the sea in goods transport. Their role was then focused on the

                                                              96
subsequent activities, the loading and unloading of ships, storage and delivery/receipt of
merchandise.

For the second generation, port and port service providers have an imperative role in the global
port functions. The port is considered a service center in the transport sector, industry and trade. It
can consequently implement and offer its users industrial or commercial services which are not
directly linked to traditional activities of loading/unloading but which are indirectly through the
logistical facilities offered by the port.

The third generation ports are owing to the global expansion containerization and intermodalism,
jointed to the growing demands of international trade. The decision-makers, managers and
operators of a port of the third generation have dissimilarity from the operation and development
point of view for which they are responsible. They perceive the port as a dynamic link in the
international production and distribution system. Their behaviour has evolved accordingly.

The fourth generation ports are characterized by internationalization and diversification on the
basis of the network system, which attaches many port areas and permits the cooperation with
other ports. These are named as network ports. These ports are integrated as international transport
logistics chain, practicing door to door services with other logistics operators working in several
geographic areas close to the ports.

Furthermore, recently some authors also discuss about the fifth generation ports, as Flynn et al.
Lee and Lam and Lee. The new concept of seaport is about the customer services. The port is
expected to provide services at a higher levels by using market mechanisms, incentives, and
government policies. Customer orientation, satisfaction, service and technology are vital factors
for the fifth generation ports. The customers have been the center of attention from of the seaport
from a long time, however, the fifth generation encourages these relationships because they would
be focusing on the ports users, ie shipping lines, may capture more clients with low emission per
TEU performance and focusing on the ports system which can in return attract more clients with
services meet th stakeholder request and achieve a high competitiveness.

It argues that the fifth generation port has a stronger focus on customer requirement port
throughput the supply chain logistics and networks as it is described by Notteboom. This requires

                                                              97
the development of communication strategies that clearly articulate the port service offering and
value proposition to customers and a port marketing framework aimed at enhancing customer
loyalty and measuring customer's satisfaction in a highly dynamic and competitive port
environment. Consequently, in the next paragraph, we decided to explore the different services of
seaport the important role that port plays in services provided to the customers. As we answer
some questions, for example? What are the characteristics of transport services? What are the port
services? Who are the customers of port services?

2.3.1 The Legal and Institutional Conception

The legal status of the port authority can be public or private. There is no definition of a port in
the law context. Thus, below the article 1 of the Geneva Convention of 9th December 1923 on the
international regime of maritime ports, All ports which are normally frequented by sea going
vessels and used for foreign trade shall be deemed to be maritime ports. The legal regime of port
management depends on the kind of traffic received by the port and on the degree to which the
port is institutionally dependent on the state or a local authority. The regime cannot always be
clearly determined simply on the basis of a port's status. The legal regime of a port depends also
on the will of the state adopting a global approach, sees to it that the port system makes the best
possible contribution to the country's development, or, adopting a local approach and regards the
port as an economic entity which should operate by its own.

An economic and political strategy is then usually preserved in instruments, which take the form
of laws where principles are concerned and regulations implemented. Constitutional system
designates the authorities empowered to adopt such instruments. The rules generally vary
according to the state whether a unitary, federal or a confederal state and having regard to the
degree of decentralization and especially to the legal systems in force in the country concerned.

The institutional regime of ports depends on how they are defined and the kind of traffic they
receive. For J.G. Matons a port is "a place on the coast specially designated by the competent
administrative authority to serve the purposes of seaborne trade". The port is an institution with or
without a legal personality, responsible for exercising public works, police or other powers in the
geographical and legal space. In the same meaning, B. Steck defined ports as "service companies,
at the center of the logistical chain which organizes world trade, to allow the flow of traffic, even

                                                              98
capturing and raising it. In order to respond to changes in the world economy, in particular to
changes brought about by technological dynamics, ports must offer an increasing number of
services which involve specific equipment in constant renewal.

The port is a place of economic activities, it is a place of exchanges where goods and people
circulate. Thus, one distinguishes between a port of the various activities more or less developed
according to the economic activity and the stakes of the region. These activities affect the structure
of the port and its vicinity.

 1. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Explain the meaning of a seaport

2.4 Port Facilities for International shipping

The port can be a natural establishment or artificial construction, which provides a place for the
loading and unloading of cargo. Ports can be for large seagoing ships and also for inland waterways
such as rivers and lakes. The depth of the ports plays a vital role in allowing various types of ships
to enter and dock at the port. But nowadays along with its basic purpose, a port is equipped with
certain other amenities and facilities. Different types of ports are equipped with different port
facilities. Some common port facilities provided by the most common sorts of ports throughout
the world are as follows:

i .Special Warehouse: This is available on all the ports, for storing the shipment and for
maintaining regular stock.

ii.Port Reception: Reception has details of all the shipment scheduled and moreover it is a guide
for the port facilities.

iii.Other facilities: Some other essential facilities are also available at seaports namely hotels,
restaurants, restrooms and eateries for the port visitors. Some of the ports are provided with
medical facilities to the people present there, if there is no hospital in the vicinity it becomes
obligatory for the port to provide with primary medical services.

iv.Fishing facilities: Fishing ports allow its customer with fishing aids and amenities at the port.

                                                              99
v. Warm water facility: A greater revenue-generating warm water port provides warm water even
in frosting winters.

vi Loading and Unloading Facility: It is the mandatory part of every port to allow loading and
unloading of freight as well as people in a ship.

vii. Infrastructure and Equipment's: A port has piers, basins, stacking or storage areas,
warehouses to store various ferry equipment. Each port is equipped with essential equipment for
e.g. hauling equipment's, draggers, cranes, trucks, loaders, etc.

viii.Workshop: All the bigger and significant ports provide the facility of vessel workshop. It is
the place where one can get spare parts and accessories of a vessel. Also, the vessels which have
gone out of order are repaired and catered in the workshop.

2.5 Types of seaports

The terms port and seaport are used for different types of port facilities that handle ocean-going
vessels, and river port is used for river traffic, such as barges and other shallow-draft vessels. Dry
port: A dry port is an inland intermodal terminal directly connected by road or rail to a seaport
and operating as a centre for the transshipment of sea cargo to inland destinations.

i.Fishing port: A fishing port is a port or harbor for landing and distributing fish. It may be a
recreational facility, but it is usually commercial. A fishing port is the only port that depends on
an ocean product, and depletion of fish may cause a fishing port to be uneconomical.

ii.Inland port: An inland port is a port on a navigable lake, river, ieluvial port, or canal with access
to a sea or ocean, which therefore allows a ship to sail from the ocean inland to the port to load or
unload its cargo. An example of this is the St. Lawrence Seaway which allows ships to travel from
the Atlantic Ocean several thousand kilometers inland to Great Lakes ports like Toronto, Duluth-
Superior, and Chicago. The term inland port is also used for dry ports.

                                                             100
iii.Seaport: A seaport is further categorized as a cruise port or a cargo port. Additionally, cruise
ports are also known as a home port or a port of call, The cargo port is also further categorized
into a bulk or break bulk port or as a container port.

iv.Cargo port: Cargo ports, on the other hand, are quite different from cruise ports, because each
handles very different cargo, which has to be loaded and unloaded by very different mechanical
means. The port may handle one particular type of cargo or it may handle numerous cargoes, such
as grains, liquid fuels, liquid chemicals, wood, automobiles, etc. Such ports are known as the bulk
or break bulk ports. Those ports that handle containerized cargo are known as container ports.
Most cargo ports handle all sorts of cargo, but some ports are very specific as to what cargo they
handle. Additionally, the individual cargo ports are divided into different operating terminals
which handle the different cargoes, and are operated by different companies, also known as
terminal operators or stevedores.

vi.Port of call: A port of call is an intermediate stop for a ship on its sailing itinerary. At these
ports, cargo ships may take on supplies or fuel, as well as unloading and loading cargo while cruise
liners have passengers get on or off ship.

vii.Warm-water port: A warm-water port is one where the water does not freeze in wintertime.
Because they are available year-round, warm-water ports can be of great geopolitical or economic
interest. Such settlements as Dalian in China, Vostochny Port, Murmansk and Petropavlovsk-
Kamchatsky in Russia, Odessa in Ukraine, Kushiro in Japan and Valdez at the terminus of the
Alaska Pipeline owe their very existence to being ice-free ports. The Baltic Sea and similar areas
have ports available year-round beginning in the 20th century thanks to icebreakers, but earlier
access problems prompted Russia to expand its territory to the Black Sea.

 2.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What are the facilities expected to be put in place in
 a port

2.6 Summary

A Seaport is a complex system with multifunctional operations thus making it difficult for the
authors to analyze its meaning explicitly. Thus, every one defined the seaport accordingly to their

                                                             101
field and knowledge. This study provided numerical syntheses which indicated the importance of
theoretical analysis in seaport sectors, these syntheses are summarized as follows:

The sea port concept has evolved over time with the relative change of the world economic,
technological and environmental. The services of transport sectors are particulars in several
characteristics which make the services of seaport complex. The users of seaport services are not
direct customers, hence, the study shows that the principal users of seaport services are the ships
and goods.The services founded for the customers are indirect services.

Finally, in the context of globalization, a port may be able to serve customers and be more
competitive. This paper pointed towards a fact that the seaport today is its customers, however, it
does not analyze how to make changes so as to maximize customer's satisfaction, keeping in view
the constraint of a large profit. The seaport is a response to customers who want to carry out their
routine operations easily when they want and without any security concerns because they know
that the port authorities deal with such issues. At the same time, there is a growing need for advice
because of the diversity of destination, the multiplication of products and the erratic evolution of
the financial markets which are confusing. This initiates the development of a traditional
relationship that binds the customer to the seaport, and the essential concerns revolving around the
different destinations of the seaport of this new relational model.

Ports are the main industrial and commercial tools for economic and social development of the
countries. The port sector is touched by the socioeconomic changes characterized by the
requirements development in the countries, through commitments by the countries of free trade
and the new contexts of globalization, to the new constraints and developments economic,
institutional, technological, environmental and maritime transport development. Therefore, the
seaports have always been disposed to changes in socioeconomic trends. These developments have
created a highly uncertain and complex environment for ports and fundamentally changed the port
concept. The seaport is a multidimensional system combined between economical function,
infrastructure system, geographical space and trade. In addition, a seaport is managed under a
complex legal concept and managed through an organizational model that mostly generates the
need for convergence of the public and private sectors. The intention of this unit is to collect the

                                                             102
different conception of seaport concept and demonstrate that has come about over time and over
countries.
(SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE): Define a sea port and types of seaport you have learned
in this unit.
A seaport is a Commercial facility where Ships load or discharge passengers or goods.
If a port is located on a lake, river, or canal that goes to a sea or ocean, that port can be defined an inland
port. Ports can also be called a harbour or harbor. Asia is the continent with some of the world's largest and
busiest ports, such as Singapore, Shanghai and Ningbo-Zhoushan.
2.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
Yoshifumi Takana: The International law of the Sea, Cambridge, University press, UK,2012
Akehurst, Michael B. A Modern Introduction to International Law. 6th ed. Boston: Allen and
Unwin, 1987.
Brierly, James Leslie. The Law of Nations. 6th ed. Edited by Humphrey Waldock. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1963.
Brownlie, Ian. Principles of Public International Law. 5th ed. New York: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Butler, William E: International Law and the International System. Boston: M. Nijhoff, 1987.
2.8 Possible Answer to Self Assement Exercise:
The main functions of seaports are: To ensure safety for seagoing vessels entering, operation in
and leaving the seaport. To provide facilities and equipment necessary for seagoing vessels to
anchor, load and unload cargo, and embark and disembark passengers.

                                                             103
Unit 3: The Right of Hot Pursuit
3.1 Introduction

The doctrine of maritime hot pursuit recognizes the right of a coastal state to pursue onto the high
seas a foreign vessel that violated its laws while within its waters. This article examines the hot
pursuit doctrine's development under customary and conventional law, particularly in light of
recently expanded coastal state jurisdictional claims over resources located in adjacent ocean areas
and the growing maritime drug interdiction effort. The article concludes that several of the
procedural standards contained in the conventional doctrine unnecessarily restrict the use of
innovative and essential technologies in the exercise of hot pursuit. The author proposes a
functional approach to defining the standards to be followed in exercising a right of hot pursuit.
The functional approach eschews detailed, mechanical standards, and instead articulates the policy
goals that must be followed in exercising the right. Such an approach will encourage innovative
approaches to maritime law enforcement without compromising the right of legitimate vessels to
navigate freely on the high seas.

If the foreign ship is within a contiguous zone, the Exclusive Economic Zone , the Continental
Shelf, the Safety Zones in the EEZ or the Continental Shelf, then the pursuit may only be
undertaken if there has been a violation of the rules and regulations (customs, fiscal, immigration
or sanitary laws and regulations of the coastal state as applicable in the respective regimes [areas,
zones). The right of hot pursuit ceases as soon as the ship pursued enters the territorial sea of a
foreign state. Where a coastal state, stopping or arresting a foreign ship outside the territorial sea
on the basis of its right of hot pursuit, fails to justify the exercise, it shall be liable to compensate
the ship for any loss or damage caused to it due to the exercise of this right. This right is
particularly relevant to fisheries management, maritime pollution laws, and the seaborne illegal
drug trade.

                                                             104
In addition, some have proposed translating the maritime right of hot pursuit into a comparable
right to pursue criminals over land borders. Although it does not form a settled tenet of
international law, the principle has been invoked by the United States regarding Taliban militants
crossing into Pakistan, by Turkey regarding its attacks on Kurdistan Workers Party bases in
northern Iraq, and by Colombia regarding its raid on a Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia
camp in Ecuador, which led to the 2008 Andean diplomatic crisis.

3.2 Learning Outcomes

It is intended that at the end of this Unit you should be able to

i. Understand the doctrine of hot pursuit in maritime law

ii. The condition to justify hot pursuit

ii.When a hot pursuit is ceased

iv.What is an offending ship and which ship are allowed to pursuit an offending ship

3.3 The Doctrine of Hot pursuit
Hot pursuit has long formed a part of English common law. The principle can be traced back to
the doctrine of distress damage feasant, which allowed a property owner to detain animals
trespassing on his land to ensure that he was compensated for the damage they had caused. In
particular, a case in 1293 held that a property owner could also chase after trespassing animals
leaving his land and catch them if he could. Later cases extended this idea to allow a property
owner to distrain the goods of a tenant behind on his rent outside his property in Kirkman v. Lelly
in 1314 and peace officers to make arrests outside their jurisdiction. In 1939, Glanville Williams
described hot pursuit as a legal fiction that treated an arrest as made at the moment when the chase
began rather than when it ended, since a criminal should not be able to benefit from an attempt to
escape. Because of its pedigree in English law, the principle has been exported to many former
colonies of the British Empire, including the United States and Canada.

                                                             105
The doctrine of hot pursuit in international law recognizes the right of a State to pursue a vessel
belonging to a foreign State which has violated any law within its territorial boundaries and
jurisdiction. The doctrine vests a right to pursue the delinquent vessel outside the territorial limits
into the open sea and then can be taken into custody. The fundamental rule of the maritime law
states that all vessels have the right to navigate freely on the high seas. Yet, the traditional notion
has recognized the doctrine of hot pursuit as an exception to the principles of freedom on the high
seas. The doctrine is not a new one and has a long history in the international maritime law. Article
23 of the Geneva Convention on the High Seas, 1958 codified the concept of hot pursuit. The same
was also adopted by the United Nations Law of the Sea Conventions under Article 111. It is very
evident that the rule of hot pursuit is an exception to the fundamental principles of freedom on the
high seas and hence should be exercised with utmost caution.

Over the years the concept of hot pursuit has developed a lot. In the present time, the latest
technology is used for the surveillance of the coastal borders of a country. But the traditional view
of the concept of hot pursuit developed largely during the canon shot era where certain procedural
rules were to be followed. These procedures are often invoked to limit the use of some essential
and sophisticated technology.For borders between the countries of the Schengen Area, hot pursuit
over the borders is allowed. This is described by the Schengen Agreement, although exact details
on distance from the border etc. are described by bilateral agreements.

3.3.2 The Right and Justification of Hot Pursuit

The customary principles of international law give the right to the states of hot pursuit. This right
can be seen as an exception to the principle of exclusive flag jurisdiction on the high seas. The
doctrine also represents a transgression upon the sovereignty on the flag of a foreign state as the
offending vessel can be pursued even beyond the maritime zones.

The right which has been provided by the doctrine is necessary to maintain the balance between
the principles of free navigation on the high seas and the interest of the States in the efficient
governance of their coastal borders. The right given by the doctrine promotes in upholding public
order by minimizing conflicts. Even though the exercise of the right of hot pursuit interferes with
the principle of free navigation, it is only exercised against a vessel which has violated the coastal

                                                             106
laws of a different State and there is a very sound reason to believe that there has indeed been a
violation. In the long term, hot pursuit does not pose any great threat to the principle of free
navigation as it is seldom used by the States.

3.3.3 Requisites of Hot Pursuit

Certain procedures are required to be followed in accordance with the norms laid down in
international laws to constitute a successful hot pursuit. One of the basic elements which are
required is that the pursuit should be immediate. The phrase implies that the pursuit should be
commenced as soon as possible after the offence is committed by the foreign vessel. Article 111
of the UNCLOS also lays down certain conditions which need to be fulfilled to exercise the right
validly.

i.The State which is exercising its right under the doctrine must have sufficient and valid reason to
believe that the foreign vessel has transgressed the law of the State.

ii. The pursuit must be started when the foreign vessel is within the internal waters, territorial sea,
archipelagic waters, contiguous zone or Exclusive Economic Zone of the State.

iii.The pursuit can be commenced only after the foreign vessel has been given an auditory or visual
signal to stop, which has been heard or seen by the foreign vessel.

iv. The right can be exercised only by authorized government vessels or warships which are
identifiable and clearly marked.

v.There should be no interruption in the pursuit

vi. The right comes to an end when the offending vessel enters the territorial sea of its own
jurisdiction or any third State.

3.4 Condition where a Hot Pursuit can be Initiated

Few conditions are needed to be fulfilled before a hot pursuit can be initiated by the State. They
are-

                                                             107
i.There must be a good reason

The guidelines given under the UNCLOS require that there should be a good and sufficient reason
to believe that the foreign vessel violated the law of the state within its territorial waters. The
phrase `good reason' means that there should be more than a mere suspicion that an offence has
been committed by the vessel. The reason should be based on a strong sign or indication. The right
of hot pursuit is limited not only to a committed offence. The right can also be exercised in the
case of attempted offence by a foreign vessel.

    iii. Commencement within the maritime Jurisdiction of the State

A foreign vessel may be pursued when it commits any wrong either physically or constructively
while it is under the jurisdiction of the law enforcing state. The alien vessel can be pursued when
it violates any domestic law within the internal water or the contiguous zone. The state also through
specific legislations may include EEZs under the ambit of the doctrine. The UNCLOS also
recognizes the right of hot pursuit in the continental shelf and safety zone around the continental
shelf.

    iv. Type of Vessel, that is, government ships

Only warships, military vessels and government vessels which are clearly marked and are
identifiable can commence the hot pursuit. These vessels should be under the service of the
government. This implies that naval submarines, enforcement vessels, coast guard vessels and
ministry or defense or military vessels can exercise the right of hot pursuit. If the government
especially authorizes any other vessel or aircraft to enforce law and order of the State, they can
also exercise the right of pursuing the alien vessel provided that they are clearly marked as being
under the service of the government.

iv.There must be signal to stop

Before the commencement of hot pursuit, the enforcement vessel must give a signal to the alien
vessel to stop implying that the alien vessel has been detected and is required to heave for boarding.
The UNCLOS stipulates that the order or signal to stop must be auditory or visual and it must be

                                                             108
given from such a distance that the foreign vessel is able to hear or see the signal given by the
enforcement vessel. Giving a signal to stop through a radio broadcast is a very debatable issue.
When the 1958 Convention was drafted, it excluded radio signal. The reason for excluding radio
signal was that there may be no limit on the distance from which a radio signal may be given.

 1.SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: What are the conditions of hot pursuit

3.5 Maintaining the Hot Pursuit

Under the international, law several conditions are needed to be fulfilled to maintain a hot pursuit-

3.5.1 Uninterrupted and Continuous Pursuit

The word interrupted has not been defined by the UNCLOS clearly but Article 111 of the
UNCLOS states that the pursuit should be a continuous one as long it is not interrupted. The law
states that that the first vessel or craft should continue pursuing the alien vessel until some other
vessel or craft which has been sent by the coastal authorities or has been summoned by the pursuing
vessel arrives at the spot and continue the pursue. There can be a few reasons for interruptions.
There may be some mechanical or technical failure in the pursuing vessel due to which it is
compelled to discontinue the hot pursuit, or due to any natural causes like darkness or bad climatic
and weather conditions the pursuing vessel is forced to give up the chase or for any other reason
like stopping to gather evidence left by the alien vessel or arrest any other small boats which are
accompanying the alien vessel.

A hot pursuit ends when the vehicle which is being pursued enters its own territorial jurisdiction
or that of any third state. A hot pursuit also comes to an end when it is abandoned or is interrupted.
The restriction which is placed is due to the fundamental rule of the sovereignty of the other state.
Convention on the Law of Sea and High Seas also states that the hot pursuit must not be resumed
when an alien vessel enters its own territorial jurisdiction or the territorial jurisdiction of a third
state and subsequently returns to the high seas. Such provisions can be sometimes used
intentionally by the alien vessels as evasive actions in case of a hot pursuit.

                                                             109
The Conventions of 1958 and 1982 do not list out any specific offences which justify hot pursuit.
Therefore, it can be derived that whatever law the coastal state may want to enforce upon the
foreign vessel can be done through hot pursuit provided that the law which the coastal state want
to enforce is legitimate. Before commencing the hot pursuit, the coastal state must determine the
gravity and intensity of the offence committed by the foreign vessel and decides that whether it is
really justified to transgress upon the freedom of navigation of the foreign vessel. There are few
offences which do justify the right to hot pursuit. Illicit drug trafficking is one of the issues which
poses a grave threat to all the nations and requires strong and quick action to tackle the problem.
Protection of the coastal borders of a nation against marine pollution and bio-degradation by
foreign vessels is also one area where the coastal state may enforce the rules and regulations by
going for a hot pursuit. A coastal state can commence a hot pursuit for the protection of its fisheries
also as these are vital resources for the coastal state not only as a source of income but also as a
source of food product and other additional industries.

3.5.2 Use of Force in a Hot Pursuit

Under the International law, the coastal state is justified in using force during a hot pursuit. But
the use of force is only to be limited to a certain extent and only as much as necessary. Also, force
should be used as a last resort. The necessary amount of force can be exercised by the coastal state
even if it in any manner infringes the freedom of the alien vessel on the high seas. But excessive
and unwarranted force will not be considered justice. The I Am Alone Case, 7 I.L.R. 203 (1935),
U.S./Canadian A.R.

For the efficient implementation and enforcement of international law, it is of vital importance that
all nations respect the rule of law. If the right given by the doctrine of hot pursuit is exercised in a
wrong manner it reflects badly upon the rule of law which might cause a discord between the
nations. The state which has engaged itself in any kind of unjustified hot pursuit should compensate
the foreign vessel owners for their losses. The 1982 Convention states that according to the natural
principle of the customary international laws, freedom of high seas is of vital importance.

 2. SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: When does hot pursuit stop

                                                             110
3.6 Summary

The doctrine of hot pursuit is of vital importance to the international law and is a firmly anchored
concept. But since many factors are included in the exercise of this right and the doctrine is an
exception to the fundamental rule of free navigation in the high seas, it should be exercised with
utmost caution. The doctrine allows coastal states to protect their own sovereignty by preventing
or stopping an alien or foreign vessel from committing an offence in the coastal state's territory.

The fundamental of the doctrine is still founded on the rules and procedures of the old era where
sophisticated technology and mechanism was not involved in the governance of a nation. The
doctrine of hot pursuit should also evolve with the changing time if it is to prove effective and
enforceable in the long run. Where the expansion of maritime rules, regulation and laws is in
question, it is important to bring these new technologies and mechanism under its ambit as they
have now become an indispensable part of the society.

The doctrine of maritime hot pursuit recognizes the right of a coastal state to pursue onto the high
seas a foreign vessel that violated its laws while within its waters. The author proposes a functional
approach to defining the standards to be followed in exercising a right of hot pursuit. The right of
a coastal state to pursue a foreign ship within its territorial waters or possibly its contiguous zone
and there capture it if the state has good reason to believe that this vessel has violated its laws. The
hot pursuit may but only if it is uninterrupted continue onto the high seas, but it must terminate
the moment the pursued ship enters the territorial waters of another state, as such pursuit would
involve an offence to the other state unless during conflict; in these circumstances extradition
should be employed instead. The doctrine applies equally to aircraft that intrude into local airspace.

3.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources

N Poulantzas, The Right of Hot Pursuit in International Law, 2nd Edition, The Hague, Martinus
Nijhoff Publications, 2002. ISBN- 9004117865.

M. McDougal and W. Burke, Public Order of the Oceans, 894 1987.

RJ Baird., Arrests in Cold Climate Part 2): Shaping Hot Pursuit through State Practice, Antarctic
and Southern Ocean Law and Policy Occasional Papers, No. 13, 2009,

                                                             111
VasiliosTasikas, Unmanned Aerial Vehicles and the Doctrine of Hot Pursuit: A New Era of Coast
Guard Maritime Law Enforcement Operations," Tulane Maritime Law Journal, Vol. 29, 2004, p.
72.

James Marissen, "Hot Pursuit or No Pursuit? The F.V. South Tomi Arrest in 2001" Australian
and New Zealand Maritime Law Journal, Vol. 16, 2002,

Fenrick, Legal Limits on the use of Force by Canadian Warships in Law Enforcement, 1980,
Canadian Y.B.A, International L.

Glanville L. Williams (1939). "The juridical basis of hot pursuit". British Yearbook of
International Law. 20: 83­97.

 R. v. Macooh 1993 CanLII 107 (26 February 1993), Supreme Court (Canada)
Nicholas M. Poulantzas (2002), The Right of Hot Pursuit in International Law, Brill­Martinus
Nijhoff
Craig H. Allen (1989), "Doctrine of hot pursuit: A functional interpretation adaptable to emerging
maritime law enforcement technologies and practices" (PDF), Ocean Development and
International Law, 20 (4): 309­341

Lionel Beehner (Winter 2011). "Can nations 'pursue' non-state actors across borders?" Yale
Journal of International Affairs: 110­112

3.8 Possible Answer to self-Assessment Exercise;

The essence of the right of hot pursuit is to ensure that vessels which have violated the rules of a
coastal state do not escape to the high seas. In effect, by virtue of the doctrine, a coastal state may
pursue and capture the offending ship on the high seas and escort it back to its port.

i The State which is exercising its right under the doctrine must have sufficient and valid reason to
believe that the foreign vessel has transgressed the law of the State.
ii.The pursuit must be started when the foreign vessel is within the internal waters, territorial sea,
archipelagic waters, contiguous zone or Exclusive Economic Zone of the State.

iii. The pursuit can be commenced only after the foreign vessel has been given an auditory or
visual signal to stop, which has been heard or seen by the foreign vessel

                                                             112
Unit 4 The Regime of Landlocked States: Access to the High Sea for states without Sea
Coast
4.1 Introduction
The archipelagic regime in Part IV of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea
was aimed at resolving an issue that had long challenged the international community, namely,
whether a group of islands should be considered a single entity and thus subject to a special regime
distinct from the rules applicable to continental land masses and individual islands. This chapter
examines the critical issues associated with the implementation of Part IV as well as future issues
that may arise. It first discusses the development of the archipelagic regime. It then addresses the
definition of an archipelago and an archipelagic State, archipelagic baselines, and archipelagic
waters, respectively, and examines issues in implementation. It considers the issue of `dependent
archipelagos' and whether there is a lacuna in LOSC in this regard. The chapter concludes with a
discussion on future areas of focus for the archipelagic regime

4.2 Learning Outcomes

It is intended that at the end of this unit you will be able to:

i.Understand what is a landlocked state, Achipelgo or Achipelagos Island

iiYou will know the rights of passage of foreign ship in international straits and their status.

iii.You will have a deep knowledge high sea

4.3 Access to the Sea by Coastal and Landlocked States

                                                             113
A landlocked country or landlocked state is a sovereign state that does not have territory connected
to an ocean or whose coastlines lie on endorheic basins. There are currently 49 landlocked
countries, including 5 partially recognized states. Generally, being landlocked creates some
political and economic handicaps that having access to international waters would avoid. For this
reason, nations large and small throughout history have sought to gain access to open waters, even
at great expense in wealth, bloodshed, and political capital. The economic disadvantages of being
landlocked can be alleviated or aggravated depending on degree of development, surrounding trade
routes and freedom of trade, language barriers, and other considerations. Some landlocked
countries are quite affluent, such as Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, and Austria, all of
which, excluding Luxembourg, which is a founding member of NATO, frequently employ
neutrality in global political issues. The majority, however, are classified as Landlocked
Developing Countries. Nine of the twelve countries with the lowest Human Development Indices
) are landlocked.

Historically, being landlocked has been disadvantageous to a country's development. It cuts a
nation off from important sea resources such as fishing, and impedes or prevents direct access to
maritime trade, a crucial component of economic and social advance. As such, coastal regions, or
inland regions that have access to the World Ocean, tended to be wealthier and more heavily
populated than inland regions that have no access to the World Ocean. Paul Collier in his book
The Bottom Billion argues that being landlocked in a poor geographic neighborhood is one of four
major development "traps" by which a country can be held back. In general, he found that when a
neighboring country experiences better growth, it tends to spill over into favorable development
for the country itself. For landlocked countries, the effect is particularly strong, as they are limited
in their trading activity with the rest of the world. He states, If you are coastal, you serve the world;
if you are landlocked, you serve your neighbors. Others have argued that being landlocked has an
advantage as it creates a natural tariff barrier which protects the country from cheap imports. In
some instances, this has led to more robust local food systems.

Landlocked developing countries have significantly higher costs of international cargo
transportation compared to coastal developing countries. A country is considered landlocked when
it is surrounded on all sides by one or more other countries and therefore has no direct access to a
coastline providing access to the oceans.

                                                             114
Article 46

Use of terms

For the purposes of this Convention:

(a) archipelagic State means a State constituted wholly by one or more archipelagos and may
include other islands;

(b) archipelago means a group of islands, including parts of islands, interconnecting waters and
other natural features which are so closely interrelated that such islands, waters and other natural
features form an intrinsic geographical, economic and political entity, or which historically have
been regarded as such.

Article 46.1 of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea defines the archipelagic
State as a State constituted wholly by one or more archipelagos and may include other islands. We
can therefore distinguish between two types of archipelagos States. Type I: coastal archipelagos
States, a State consisting of a territory that is part of a continent, followed by a group of islands
nears its coasts that are archipelagos. A typical example of this species is the Norwegian coastal
archipelago. The second type is the archipelagos States, which means a State whose whole territory
consists of one or more archipelago surrounded by seawater or ocean, such as the Philippines,
Indonesia and Fiji.

4.3.1 Traffic System in the Archipelagic Waters

Although archipelagic waters are subject to the sovereignty of the archipelagic state, there are
rights to other states in these waters. These rights constitute restrictions on the archipelagic state.
The most important of these restrictions is the passage of two types of traffic in archipelagic waters,
namely the right of innocent passage, the right of archipelagic traffic. The regime adopted by the
Convention on the Right of Foreign Ships to Exercise International. Navigation via Archipelagic
Water is a kind of reconciliation between archipelagic water subordination to the sovereignty of
the State and considerations of guaranteeing the freedom of international navigation and not
placing impediments to its movement.
The Right of Innocent Passage through Archipelagic Waters In 1982, the United Nations
Convention on the Law of the Sea recognized the right of foreign vessels to pass through
archipelagic waters. Article 52, paragraph 1, of the Convention states: "Subject to article 53 and

                                                             115
without prejudice to article 50, ships of all States shall enjoy the right of innocent passage during
archipelagic waters, in accordance with Part III, section 3". It is clear from this text that innocent
passage in archipelagic waters is subject to the same rules as the Convention, which governs and
regulates innocent passage in the territorial sea.

4.4 Group of Islands
The word archipelago refers to an island chain. An archipelago is a type of landform that consists
of a group of islands, often including similar formations like atolls or islets. The islands that make
up an archipelago are clustered or form a chain within a body of water, such as an ocean, gulf, sea,
or lake. An archipelago is an area that contains a chain or group of islands scattered in lakes,
rivers, or the ocean. West of British Columbia, Canada, and south of the Yukon Territory, the
southeastern coastline of Alaska trails off into the islands of the Alexander Archipelago.

Archipelagos geographic type may be found in isolated in large amounts of water or neighbouring
a large land mass. For example, Scotland has more than 700 islands surrounding its mainland
which form an archipelago Archipelagos are often volcanic, forming along island arcs generated
by subduction zones or hotspots, but may also be the result of erosion, deposition, and land
elevation. Depending on their geological origin, islands forming archipelagos can be referred to as
oceanic islands, continental fragments, and continental islands. Oceanic islands are mainly of
volcanic origin, and widely separated from any adjacent continent. The Hawaiian Islands and
Easter Island in the Pacific, and Île Amsterdam in the south Indian Ocean are examples.

4.5 Straits for International Navigation

In international law, straits used for international navigation and therefore open to ships of all
countries under equal conditions. Freedom of the high seas is a generally recognized principle of
international law, and the legal regime that applies to the high seas also applies to straits that link
two parts of the high seas and that are important international waterways. International straits are
free for navigation by ships of all nations, regardless of whether or not they overlap with the

                                                             116
territorial waters of littoral states. Among such international straits are the Strait of Gibraltar, La
Manche (the English Channel), the Strait of Dover, Singapore Strait, and the Strait of Magellan.

International straits that are the only outlet from enclosed seas to the high seas have a special legal
status. The rules of navigation in such straits are regulated by special international agreements that
in many cases contain restrictions on entry into enclosed seas by warships of countries without
coastlines on those seas. Some straits are more important than others because they are the sole
connecting links between oceans and interior waters. For example, the Strait of Gibraltar gives
access from the Atlantic Ocean to the Mediterranean and Aegean Seas. Other straits are not as
important. The availability of alternate routes does not in itself deprive a strait of its character as
an international waterway. In the Corfu Channel case, 1949 I.C.J. 4, 1949 WL 1 (I.C.J.), the
international court of justice rejected the test of essentiality as the only route, ruling that "the
decisive criterion is rather [the strait's] geographic situation as connecting two parts of the high
seas and the fact of its being used for international navigation.

Article34

Legal status of waters forming straits used for international navigation.

1. The regime of passage through straits used for international navigation established in this Part
shall not in other respects affect the legal status of the waters forming such straits or the exercise
by the States bordering the straits of their sovereignty or jurisdiction over such waters and their air
space, bed and subsoil.

2. The sovereignty or jurisdiction of the States bordering the straits is exercised subject to this Part
and to other rules of international law.

4.6 Summary

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 provided rights for landlocked states
on the sea. More importantly, the convention provided them with the right of access to and from
the seas and freedom of transit. However, the law makes such rights subject to the agreements to
be made by landlocked and transit states. This, in turn, depends on the prevailing relations between
the concerned states. If they are not in a smooth relation, the transit states may not be willing to

                                                             117
negotiate and thereby put impediments on the landlocked states' free transit. The political will and
commitment of transit states highly conditioned the rights of landlocked states. The denial of free
transit, in turn, affects the rights of landlocked states on the different maritime regimes.
Landlocked states have no absolute right of access to and from the seas and freedom of transit.
Hence, the study concludes that to give practical effect to those rights, negotiating bilateral and
multilateral agreements with the transit states has a crucial and irreplaceable role. The archipelagic
regime in Part IV of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was aimed at
resolving an issue that had long challenged the international community, namely, whether a group
of islands should be considered a single entity and thus subject to a special regime distinct from
the rules An archipelago is a group of closely scattered islands. St. David's Island, above is part of
the archipelago that makes up the British territory of Bermuda (officially called the Bermudas) in
the Atlantic Ocean.

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, also called the Law of the Sea Convention
or the Law of the Sea treaty, is the international agreement that resulted from the third United
Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea UNCLOS III, which took place between 1973 and 1982.
The Law of the Sea Convention defines the rights and responsibilities of nations with respect to
their use of the world's oceans, establishing guidelines for businesses, the environment, and the
management of marine natural resources. The Convention, concluded in 1982, replaced the quad-
treaty 1958 Convention on the High Seas. UNCLOS came into force in 1994, a year after Guyana
became the 60th nation to ratify the treaty. As of June 2016, 167 countries and the European Union
have joined in the Convention. It is uncertain as to what extent the Convention codifies customary
international law.

While the Secretary-General of the United Nations receives instruments of ratification and
accession and the UN provides support for meetings of states party to the Convention, the UN has
no direct operational role in the implementation of the Convention. There is, however, a role played
by organizations such as the International Maritime Organization, the International Whaling
Commission, and the International Seabed Authority ). The ISA was established by the UN
Convention.

                                                             118
The term archipelago is used to refer to the sea areas spread by a group of islands and on the same
islands at the same time. The islands can therefore be used as synonyms for the archipelago.
However, the geographical location distinguishes between two types of archipelagos, where there
are coastal archipelagos near the continental coasts, archipelagos located in the middle of the seas
and oceans consisting of several islands and forming an independent State

4.7 References/Further Reading
Whittaker R. J. & Fernández-Palacios J. M. (2007) Island Biogeography: Ecology, Evolution, and
Conservation. New York, Oxford University Press
Indonesia. The World Factbook. Washington, DC: Central Intelligence Agency of the United
States. 4 December 2008. Archived from the original on 10 December 2008. Retrieved 7
December 2008.
James Marissen, "Hot Pursuit or No Pursuit? The F.V. South Tomi Arrest in 2001" Australian
and New Zealand Maritime Law Journal, Vol. 16, 2002,
Fenrick, Legal Limits on the use of Force by Canadian Warships in Law Enforcement, 1980,
Canadian Y.B.A, International L.
Glanville L. Williams (1939). "The juridical basis of hot pursuit". British Yearbook of
International Law. 20: 83­97.

 R. v. Macooh 1993 CanLII 107 (26 February 1993), Supreme Court (Canada)
Nicholas M. Poulantzas (2002), The Right of Hot Pursuit in International Law, Brill­Martinus
Nijhoff
Craig H. Allen (1989), "Doctrine of hot pursuit: A functional interpretation adaptable to emerging
maritime law enforcement technologies and practices" (PDF), Ocean Development and
International Law, 20 (4): 309­341
Lionel Beehner (Winter 2011). "Can nations 'pursue' non-state actors across borders?" (Access to
the esseaPDF). Yale Journal of International Affairs: 110­112.

                                                             119
MODULE FOUR: THE REGIME OF CONTRACT OF CARRIAGE OF GOODS BY SEA

Unit 1: Definition, Nature and Types of Contract of Carriage of Goods by Sea

1.1 Introduction

The law of Carriage of Goods by Sea is generally referred to as Dry Shipping Law because it
mainly focuses on the legal implications of the agreements for the transport of cargoes by sea and
for the chartering of vessels. The business of carriage of goods by sea is obviously risky. The cargo
may arrive late or not at all. How are the various risks allocated between the carriers and the various
other parties who might have an interest in the ship and her cargo? Contract of carriage can come
in various shapes and in this course you will study the two main forms of contract and carriage
and their uses.

It is right to say that trade in goods represent an essential share in the gross domestic product of
most states or regions, and that international trade transactions continue to support significantly,
the economic growth and development of various nations. However, it must be noted that this trade
is largely dependent on the transportation of such goods from one place to another except, of
course, where the sale relates to electronic items such as software and electronic books. Otherwise,
transportation is integral to international trade and depending on the sale contract e.g. cost,
insurance, freight CIF or free on board - FOB between the seller and the buyer, the seller is usually
responsible for arranging for the transportation of the cargo from his country to the buyer's
country. The transportation of goods may be by air, road, rail, or sea. The transportation of goods,
by whatever mode, must be done in a safe and efficient manner if the parties to the transaction are

                                                             120
to be satisfied and trade relations, sustained. Therefore, it is paramount to have in place binding
agreement between parties to any contract for the transportation of goods as well as laws which
create, unify and if necessary, regulate the transactions by setting minimum or further obligations,
liabilities and rights for the parties. This unit is concerned with contracts of carriage of goods by
sea, and consequently, excludes discussions on carriage by other modes of transportation. The sea
mode of transportation of goods is perhaps the most used as about 80% of internationally traded
goods are carried by sea.

1.2 Learning Outcome

It is intended that at end of this Unit you should be able to

    i. Understand and analyze the legal regime of the contract of carriage of goods by sea.
    ii. The two major means of the contract of carriage by sea
    iii. Know the Legal regime governing the contract of carriage by seas

1.3 Contract of Carriage of Goods by Sea

The law of carriage of goods by sea is a body of law that governs the rights and duties of shippers,
carriers and consignees of marine cargo. The great majority of contracts governing the
transportation of goods by ships are made either by bills of lading or charter parties. The term
charter party is a corruption of the Latin carta partita, or "divided charter." It is used to describe
three types of contracts dealing with the use of ships owned or controlled by others. Under a demise
charter, the ship-owner gives possession of the vessel to the charterer, who engages the ship's
master and crew, arranges for repairs and supplies, takes on the cargo, and acts much like the
owner during the term of the charter.

The contract of carriage of goods by sea can easily be seen as a contract involving two parties who
for an agreed sum agree to be bound by the terms reached by them. But this definition may be very
misleading, for though the contract of carriage involve this important element it is not the same as
the usual contracts reached and agreed by parties.Perhaps looking at some definitions posed by
some authorities, more light would be shed on the nature of this kind of contract. Clive M.
Schmitthoff tried to give a vivid description as to the nature of this contract, here he said that a
contract of carriage entails a situation where an exporter concludes with a ship owner to carry

                                                             121
goods in his ship from one port to another, usually overseas, such contract is known as the contract
of carriage by sea. R.M. Goode on the other hand sees a contract of carriage involving two parties
the shipper and the carrier. The shipper is the person to whom the carrier undertakes the duty of
transporting the goods. Black's Law Dictionary defines it as an agreement for carriage of goods
by water, which may employ a bill of lading, a charter party or both to ship goods.

A contract of carriage of goods by sea is one which is made for transportation of a bulk or general
cargo between a shipper a seller or buyer and a carrier a shipowner or charterer of the cargo. The
contract may be embodied in a charterparty where the shipper of goods charters a ship from the
shipowner or evidenced by a bill of lading where the shipper procures shipping space from the
shipowner or a charterer. Thus, where a shipowner makes available his entire vessel for a particular
voyage, a specific period of time or by demise the contract of carriage is termed a `charterparty'
and generally governed by common law principles which afford the parties the freedom to
negotiate terms without statutory interference.

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea 1982 under Article 1 Carriage of Goods
By Sea Act defines contract of carriage as those that: Apply only to contracts covered by a bill of
lading or any similar document of title, in so far as such document relates to the carriage of goods
by sea, including any bill of lading or any similar document as aforesaid issued under a pursuant
to a charter party from the moment at which such bill of lading or similar document of title
regulates the relations between a carrier and a holder of the same.

1.3 .1 Evolution of carriage by sea

Until the development of railroads, the most prominent mode of transport was by water. Overland
transportation of goods was relatively slow, costly, and perilous. For this reason, the law governing
carriage of goods by sea developed much earlier than that governing inland transportation. The
preclassical Greek city-states had well-developed laws dealing with the carriage of goods by sea,
along with specialized commercial courts to settle disputes among carriers, shippers, and
consignees. The sea laws of the island of Rhodes achieved such prominence that a part of them
was carried, many centuries later, into the legislation of Justinian.

                                                             122
In Roman law the contract of carriage did not achieve the status of a distinct contractual form; juris
consults (legal advisers) dealt with it in the framework of the contractual forms known to them,
such as deposit and hire of services or of goods. There was special regulation only insofar as the
responsibility of the carrier was concerned: shipowners (nautae), along with innkeepers and stable
keepers, were liable without fault for destruction of or damage to the goods of passengers.
Nevertheless, they could be relieved of responsibility by proving that the loss was attributable to
irresistible force.

In English common law the principles applying to the relationship between the carrier and his
customers go back to a time when neither railways nor canals existed. Whether influenced by
Roman law or derived quite independently, early English decisions imposed on carriers the
obligation not only to carry goods but to carry them safely and to deliver them in good condition
to the owner or his agent. The carrier was always liable for the loss of the goods and also liable for
any damage to the goods, unless he could prove that the loss or damage had resulted from an
excepted cause. This duty of the carrier to deliver the goods safely was considered to exist without
regard to obligations arising under any contract between the parties. It was imposed upon him by
the law because he had been put in possession of another's goods. In legal language, this meant
that the carrier was considered to be a bailee, who, in certain circumstances, was liable to the bailor
if he failed to deliver the goods intact. This law of bailment developed in England long before the
law of contract. The contractual element of bailment was not stressed until after the 17th century.
Today, in common-law countries, the rights and liabilities of shippers, consignees, and carriers are
in the large majority of cases based on a contract of carriage, whether express or tacit. The mere
fact that, in the ordinary course of his business, a carrier accepts goods for carriage and delivery
implies the making of a contract of carriage. The right of the carrier to claim the freight depends
on this contract, and this contract is also the foundation of his duty to carry the goods safely to
their destination. But there remain vestiges of bailment in the law of carriage of goods. Thus, the
owner of the goods, though not a party to the contract of carriage between the shipper and the
carrier, may sue the carrier for loss of or damage to his goods.

In France and in a great number of countries following the French system, a contract of carriage
requires the presence of three indispensable elements: carriage, control of the operation by the
carrier, and a professional carrier. If any of these elements is missing, the contract is one for the

                                                             123
hire of services rather than a special contract of carriage. The classification of a contract as a
contract of carriage involves significant legal consequences. Exculpatory clauses in a contract of
carriage are ordinarily null and void; receipt of the goods by the consignee and payment of the
freight without protest within a designated period of time exclude all actions against the carrier;
actions that may be brought against the carrier are subject to a short period of limitation, that is,
one year; the carrier has a privilege, which corresponds to a common-law lien, on the things carried
for the payment of the freight; and, finally, either party to a contract of carriage may demand that
experts determine the condition of the things carried or intended to be carried.

1.4 Characteristics of carriage of goods by sea

    The law of Carriage of Goods by Sea is generally referred to as Dry Shipping Law because it
    mainly focuses on the legal implications of the agreements for the transport of cargoes by sea
    and for the chartering of vessels. The business of carriage of goods by sea is obviously risky.
    The cargo may arrive late or not at all. How are the various risks allocated between the carriers
    and the various other parties who might have an interest in the ship and her cargo? Contract of
    carriage can come in various shapes and in this course you will study the two main forms of
    contract and carriage and their uses.

i.Common-law Common carrier

In English and American law, common carriers are distinguished from other carriers. A common
carrier is one who holds himself out as being ready to carry goods for the public at large for hire
or reward. In England carriers of goods by land that are not classified as common carriers are
termed private carriers; carriers of goods by sea or by inland water that are not classified as
common carriers may be public carriers, namely, professional carriers who do not hold themselves
out as ready to serve the general public or persons who carry goods incidentally to their main
business or for one consignor only. In the United States distinction is made among common
carriers, contract carriers, and private carriers. A person who engages to carry the goods of
particular individuals rather than of the general public is a contract carrier; a person who carries
his own goods is a private carrier. Both a common carrier and a contract carrier are engaged in
transportation as a business. The basic difference between them is that a common carrier holds
himself out to the general public to engage in transportation, whereas a contract carrier does not

                                                             124
hold himself out to serve the general public. The exact boundary between common carriage and
contract carriage is not always clear.

A person may be a common carrier although he limits the kinds of goods that he is ready to carry,
the mode of transport, or the route over which he is prepared to carry. He is a common carrier only
to the extent that he holds himself out as ready to carry goods for the public. It is indispensable for
the classification that he accepts reward for the carriage and that his principal undertaking is the
carriage of goods. Ancillary carriage for purposes of warehousing does not make one a common
carrier. Unless the law provides otherwise, a carrier may cease at any time to be a common carrier
by giving notice that he is no longer ready to carry goods for the public at large.

ii.Civil-law public carrier

The concept of common carrier has no exact equivalent in civil-law systems. But, if one looks to
substance rather than form or terminology, one may conclude that the concept of public carrier in
civil-law systems is a functional equivalent of the concept of common carrier. A public carrier is
a professional carrier of goods or passengers; he is distinguished from a private carrier who either
carries his own goods exclusively or carries goods incidentally to his other business. Generally,
the scope of private carriage is narrowly defined so that most carriage operations fall under the
rubric of public carriage; this ensures maximum application of rules designed to safeguard the
public interest in the carriage of goods. Public carriers, like common carriers in common-law
countries, are subject to strict economic regulation and are under the supervision and control of
administrative agencies. When a public carrier is also a professional merchant, normally an
individual or a private corporation, he assumes all the duties, obligations, and liabilities attaching
to merchants under applicable commercial codes or special legislation. Like a common carrier, a
public carrier must accept the goods lawfully delivered to him for carriage, either because he is
held to a permanent offer made to the public or because he is under obligation to carry by virtue
of public legislation or administrative regulations. Unlike common carriers, public carriers are not
liable for loss or damage to the goods without fault; this difference is more apparent than real,
because carriers in civil-law systems are presumed to be liable, unless they prove that the loss or
damage occurred without their fault.

                                                             125
iii.The Actual Carrier
The carrier is defined as the person who carries goods by the sea in return for a certain fee this fee
is referred to as freight under Turkish maritime trade law. In order to be considered as a sea carrier,
a person does not have to perform the carriage personally, it would be sufficient for the carrier to
undertake the carriage. In this respect, the carrier may perform the carriage in accordance with the
contract of carriage in person, or assign someone else to perform the carriage, partially or wholly.
The person who is assigned to perform the carriage, partially or wholly, is considered to be the
actual carrier. In such case, the carrier who assigned the carriage is considered to be the contracting
carrier.

In order to have an actual carrier in a carriage relationship, the carrier who undertakes the carriage
under a freight contract should assign someone else for the performance under another freight
contract. Consequently, there are two separate freight contracts and two separate contracts of
carriage. The first contract is established within the framework of the freight contract concluded
between the shipper who approaches the carrier to have his goods carried, and the carrier who
undertakes the carriage. The second one is established between the carrier who undertakes the
carriage in accordance with the freight contract concluded with the shipper, but will not actually
perform the carriage, partially or wholly, and the (actual) carrier who undertakes the carriage. The
subject of this second freight contract, which is concluded between the contractual carrier and the
actual carrier is partially or totally the same as the first freight contract, and it aims to perform the
carriage partially or in total, which is undertaken by the contractual carrier.

In the case of damage or delay, where there are multiple contracts of carriage and multiple carriers,
being able to establish each carrier's period of liability through carriage would be important.

Actual carrier is any person to whom the performance of the carriage of the goods, or of part of
the carriage, has been entrusted by the carrier, and includes any other person to whom such
performance has been entrusted.

1.4.1 Types of Contract of Carriage
There are two types of contract of carriage:

                                                             126
i. Charter party
ii. Bill of Lading
i.Charter Party
According to Chuah where the shipper intending to ship goods, wants the use of an entire vessel
for that purpose, he might wish to enter into a direct contract of carriage with the ship owner, for
the charter of the latter's ship. This transaction is known as a charter party. Here the charterer pays
freight in exchange for use of the ship. Another authority sees a charter party

as a contract for the hire of an entire ship for a specified voyage or period of time. It is important
to point out that a charter party is not subject to the Carriage of Goods Act or any other statute. It
is principally governed by the rule of common law and thus the parties are free to make any term
as they wish.

ii.Bill of Lading

In circumstances where bills of lading are used, usually what we see in this case is the shipper of
goods not wishing to contract for the entire ship, but rather some cargo space on board. Here he
contracts with either the ship owners or the charterer, depending on the arrangement. In cases were
the latter's applicable, the parties are not bound by the Carriage of Goods by sea Act, as already
enunciated above. But where parties to the contract reach an agreement, the trade usage in such
instances is that the shipper receives a bill of lading from the carrier as evidence of the shipment
contract.

A bill of lading, is a document which states that certain specified goods have been shipped in a
particular ship and which purports to set out the terms on which the goods have been delivered to
and received by the ship.

It is common practice for carriers to convey various cargoes for different shippers, in the sense the
ship is said to be employed as a general ship under different bills of lading, this is in sharp contrast
with the charter party where to whole ship is more often than not in the control of the charterer,
who may decide whether or not to adopt the use of the bill of lading in their transactions.

                                                             127
1.5 Components of the Carriage of Goods

Delay and misdelivery

In all legal systems, carriers incur liability for delay in delivering the goods to the consignee.
Statutes, international conventions, administrative regulations, or even contractual agreements
may fix the period of transportation with reference to the applicable means of carriage and
determine the consequences of the delay. Under the law of contracts, failure of the carrier to deliver
the goods within the prescribed period of time will be treated as a breach of contract.

In common-law jurisdictions, if the delay is caused by a deviation, the carrier is ordinarily
answerable for damages. A deviation takes place when the carrier leaves the route that he has
expressly or impliedly agreed to follow or when he goes past his destination. In civil-law
jurisdictions, carriers are not bound to follow any particular route in the absence of special
legislation or contractual agreement. Thus, a deviation from the normal route does not itself
constitute a fault of the carrier; if the deviation causes a delay, the carrier will be liable only if he
is at fault. Like delay, misdelivery engages the responsibility of the carrier. Misdelivery is the
delivery of the goods by the carrier to the wrong person or to the wrong place.

National and international regulation

In all legal systems the law of carriage has been influenced by the idea that carriers enjoy a factual
monopoly. The services that a customer may demand and the remuneration that a carrier may exact
are generally regulated by legislation or administrative regulations. The growth of competition
among carriers and means of transport in the Western world has led to a reduction in the scope of
municipal legislation in a number of countries, but international conventions and administrative
regulations have proliferated. The right to carry on a transport business is still everywhere

                                                             128
regulated through elaborate licensing systems, and the operations of transport are subject to
continuous supervision and control by appropriate agencies. The legal relation between the carrier
and his customer is affected by this intervention of the public authorities, and public as well as
private laws form the body of the law of carriage.

1.5.1 Typical clauses

A charterparty may contain these clauses.

Bunker clause: A bunker clause stipulates that the charterer shall accept and pay for all fuel oil in
the vessel's bunkers at port of delivery and conversely, owners shall pay for all fuel oil in the
vessel's bunkers at port of re-delivery at current price at the respective ports. It is customary to
agree upon a certain minimum and maximum quantity in bunkers on re-delivery of the vessel.
Since the OW Bunker test case, ship operators need to take care to ensure that bunker supply terms
are suitable.

Ship clause: Under this clause, the owner of the ship writes clearly that the ship would be
seaworthy at the start of the voyage in every respect, in other words, the ship would be appropriate
to travel to the country for which it is taken.

Ice clause: An ice clause is inserted in a bill of lading or a charterparty when a vessel is bound for
a port or ports which may be closed to shipping by ice when the vessel arrives or after the vessel's
arrival.

Lighterage clause: A lighterage clause is inserted into charter-parties which show as port of
discharge any safe port in a certain range, e.g. Havre/Hamburg range.

Negligence clause: A negligence clause tends to exclude ship owner's or carrier's liability for loss
or damage resulting from an act, default or neglect of the master, mariner, pilot or the servants of
the carrier in the navigation of manoeuvring of a ship, not resulting, however, from want of due
diligence by the owners of the ship or any of them or by the ship's husband or manager.

Ready berth clause: A ready berth clause is inserted in a charter party, i.e. a stipulation to the
effect that laydays will begin to count as soon as the vessel has arrived at the port of loading or

                                                             129
discharge whether in berth or not. It protects shipowner's interests against delays which arise from
ships having to wait for a berth.

1.6 Summary

A contract to carry goods or passengers by sea. Carriage of passengers or goods by sea depends
on the individual contracts involved; such a contract may exclude or limit liability for damage to
goods, or death or injury to passengers. However, international contracts are governed by
international conventions. The relation between the contract of carriage and the B/L becomes an
issue at times when there is a reference in one to the other. The TCC clearly sets forth that the
provisions of a contract of carriage, where the nature of such provisions so allows, may only be
binding on the holder of the B/L if a copy of the contract of carriage is represented to the holder
of the B/L. Although there are only a few decisions with respect to this issue, the decisions show
that the Court of Cassation examines, in such cases, whether or not the contract of carriage, which
is referred to in the B/L, has been provided to the holder of the B/L.

When a ship strands or collides with another vessel, cargo loss or damage may occur. If the damage
was caused by a sea peril or an error in navigation, the carrier will not be liable if the goods were
being carried under a statutory or contractual provision based on the 1923 Brussels Convention on
Limitation on Liability. If, however, the damage was caused by the carrier's failure to exercise due
diligence to make the ship seaworthy and to ensure that it was properly staffed, equipped, and
supplied, the carrier will be held responsible.

Man has always been by his nature an interactive and interdependent being, and trade has been
one of those means by which he interacts and shows his interdependency. He engages in the
exchange of goods and services for a valuable consideration. The concept of international trade is
not new to man, only that here, this form of exchange seems to resonate on a much broader
platform involving a complex web of structures and processes which makes this sort of transaction
possible and one of this structure is the carriage of goods by sea, thus it is important to point out
that, this form of transportation of goods is not only vital to international trade, but it also forms
an integral part of it, that the absence it would make international trade very difficult to undertake.
Though our focus is the rights and obligations of parties under the carriage of goods by sea, full

                                                             130
appreciation of this rights and duties will not be attained, if some attention is not given to highlight
the nature of this form of transaction.

A contract of carriage is an agreement that is concluded between a carrier and a shipper for the
carriage of goods by sea, in which a carrier, against the payment of freight, undertakes to deliver
goods from one port to another. While concluding a contract of carriage, the negotiations are made
by the shipper and the carrier, and the terms and conditions are established by the above-mentioned
parties. In general, the contract of carriage is executed with the carrier by either the seller or the
purchaser, depending on the terms of the sale agreement. However, in maritime trade, at times the
contract of carriage provides a clause that the shipment shall be subject to the terms and conditions
of the Bill of Lading, a document which is issued unilaterally at a later stage by the carrier. On the
other hand, some Bills of Lading refer to the contract of carriage for the terms and conditions.
Therefore, it is crucial to understand the relation between contracts of carriage and Bills of Lading,
and the effects of these two documents on the parties to the carriage.

 SELE ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Analyze the two major contract in the carriage of
 goods by Sea

1.7References/Further Reading/Web Resources

John F. Wilson, Carriage of Goods by Sea, (7th ed, Pearson Education Ltd., 2010) at page 3

Bernard Eder et al., (eds) Scrutton on Charterparties and Bills of Lading (23rd ed, Sweet &
Maxwell, 2015)
William P. Bennett, The History and Present Position of the Bill of Lading as a Document of Title
to Goods, (Cambridge University Press, 1914) for the historical evolution and construction of the
bill of lading in international trade.
Glenn R Bauer, Conflicting Liability Regimes: Hague-Visby Rules-Visby v Hamburg Rules A
Case by Case Analysis,' (1993) 24 (1) J Mar L & Com 53, at page56
Bradgate, R. Commercial Law, 2nd Edition. London: Butterworths (1995).
Carver Carriage By Sea, 12th Edition. London: Stevens and Sons (1971).

                                                             131
Chuah, J.C.T. Law of International Trade. London: Sweet and Maxwell (1998).
Fridman, G.H.L. the Law of Agency, 7th Edition. London: Butterworths (1996).
Goode Commercial Law. London: Penguin Books (1982).
Ivamy, H.E.R. Payne and Ivamy's Carriage of Goods by Sea, 12th Edition. London: Butterworths
1985.
Orojo, O. Nigerian Commercial Law and Practice. Ibadan: Spectrum Law Series.
1.8 Possible Answer to self-assessment Exercise:
Shipping Contracts means all contracts, orders and arrangements of company with shippers for
Company to transport goods and products of shippers from pick up points to delivery points. A
contract of carriage of goods by sea is one which is made for transportation of a bulk or general
cargo between a shipper a seller or buyer and a carrier a shipowner or charterer of the cargo.
The major contract for carriage of goods by sea is either by charterparty or by the use of bill of
lading. The contract may be embodied in a charterparty where the shipper of goods charters a ship
from the shipowner) or evidenced by a bill of lading where the shipper procures shipping space
from the shipowner or a charterer.

                                                             132
Unit 2: Bills of Lading Contracts and Functions

2.1 Introduction
The great majority of contracts governing the transportation of goods by ships are made either by
bills of lading or charter parties. While there is evidence of the existence of receipts for goods
loaded aboard merchant vessels stretching back as far as Roman times, and the practice of
recording cargo aboard ship in the ship's log is almost as long-lived as shipping itself, the modern
bill of lading only came into use with the growth of international trade in the medieval world. The
growth of mercantilism which produced other financial innovations such as the charterparty once
carta partita, the bill of exchange and the insurance policy pr oduced a requirement for a title
document that could be traded in much the same way as the goods themselves. It was this new
avenue of trade that produced the bill of lading in much the same form as we know today.
2.2 Learning Outcomes
At the end of this unit you will be able to:
i.Explain the role of bill of lading and types of bill of Lading
ii. Learn about the importance of bill of lading in the carriage of goods by sea
iii.You will have the knowledge of the legal character of a bill of Lading
iv.The aim of the unit is that you will understand the use of bill of lading for seagoing vessels

2.3 Bill of Lading in the Contract of carriage by sea
The term "bill" is defined as a printed or written statement of the cost for the goods or services
delivered or to be delivered. Transportation Company (carrier) issues these records to the shipper.
A bill of lading indicates a particular carrier through which the goods have been placed to their

                                                             133
final destination and the conditions for transporting the shipment to its final destination. Land,
ocean and air are the means used for bills of lading.

A bill of lading is a document issued by a carrier to acknowledge receipt of cargo for shipment.
Although the term historically related only to carriage by sea, a bill of lading may today be used
for any type of carriage of goods. A comprehensive article on Bill of Lading Bills of lading are
one of three crucial documents used in international trade to ensure that exporters receive payment
and importers receive the merchandise. The other two documents are a policy of insurance and an
invoice.[3] Whereas a bill of lading is negotiable, both a policy and an invoice are assignable. In
international trade outside the United States, bills of lading are distinct from waybills in that the
latter are not transferable and do not confer title. Nevertheless, the UK Carriage of Goods by Sea
Act 1992 grants all rights of suit under the contract of carriage to the lawful holder of a bill of
lading, or to the consignee under a sea waybill or a ship's delivery order.

A bill of lading is a standard-form document that is transferable by endorsement or by lawful
transfer of possession. Most shipments by sea are covered by the Hague Rules, the Hague-Visby
Rules or the Hamburg Rules, which require the carrier to issue the shipper a bill of lading
identifying the nature, quantity, quality and leading marks of the goods. In the case of Coventry v
Gladstone, Lord Justice Blackburn defined a bill of lading as "A writing signed on behalf of the
owner of ship in which goods are embarked, acknowledging the receipt of the Goods, and
undertaking to deliver them at the end of the voyage, subject to such conditions as may be
mentioned in the bill of lading." Therefore, it can be stated that the bill of lading was introduced
to provide a receipt to the shipper in the absence of the owners.

Although the term "bill of lading" is well known and well understood, it may become obsolete.
Articles 1:15 & 1:16 of the Rotterdam Rules create the new term transport document but (assuming
the Rules come into force) it remains to be seen whether shippers, carriers and "maritime
performing parties" another new Rotterdam Rules coinage) will abandon the long-established and
familiar term bill of lading.

A contract of carriage of goods by sea as stated earlier is one made between a shipper and a carrier
by which the carrier will, for a charge, undertake to transport the shipper's cargo to a destination

                                                             134
and deliver to a designated person. Often than not, there is a verbal agreement between the parties
further to which the carrier issues a bill of lading upon shipment of the cargo. The bill of lading
will therefore: record the goods as having been loaded on board the ship and as such serve the
function of a receipt for such goods; a document of title to such goods; and an evidence of the
contract of carriage between parties.

It should be noted that between the carrier and the shipper, the bill is only an evidence of the
contract between the parties thus, in Owners of the Cargo Lately Laden on Board the Ardennes v
Owners of the Ardennes (the Ardennes) the carrier's verbal undertaking to the shipper, to sail to
London directly was held to be binding even though the bill of lading stated that the carrier can
break the journey. The court decided that the bill of lading is not itself the contract of carriage
between the shipper and the carrier although it is an excellent evidence of it. The bill is however,
a contract of carriage when transferred to a third party, endorsee or consignee

Today, nearly every contract of carriage covered by a bill of lading is governed by an international
convention. And as stated above, these conventions, basically define and set minimum contractual
obligations for the parties, and further make it unlawful for them to by agreement, avoid or lessen
such obligations. The carrier may however, undertake to assume obligations which are higher than
the minimum.

2.3.1 Legal character of a bill of Lading

The carrier need not require all originals to be submitted before delivery. It is therefore essential
that the exporter retains control over the full set of the originals until payment is effected or a bill
of exchange is accepted or some other assurance for payment has been made to him. A bill of
lading, therefore, is a very important issue when making shipments to move the cargo or freight
from one point to the other. On one hand it is a contract between a carrier and shipper for the
transportation of goods and on the other hand, it serves as a receipt issued by a carrier to the
shipper.

Hence, the bill of lading is considered a legal document which provides all the vital details to the
shipper and the carrier to conveniently process the freight shipment through different maritime
countries and invoice it correctly.The bill of lading document is meant to act as a transport

                                                             135
document enacting as the evidence of the contract of carriage of the goods. A negotiable bill of
lading has the following legal qualities:

1.It acts as a piece of evidence for the carriage contract containing the terms and condition under
which the goods transportation will be carried out. That is

2.4 Types of Bill of Lading

i. Straight bill of lading reveals that the goods are consigned to a specified person and it is not
negotiable free from existing equities. It means any endorsee acquires no better rights than those
held by the endorser. This type of bill is also known as a non-negotiable bill of lading, and from
the banker's point of view, this type of bill of lading is not safe. This type of bill is prominently
used for military cargo.

ii.Open bill of lading ­ This is a negotiable bill of lading where the name of Consignee can be
changed with consignees' signature and thus transferred. This can be transferred multiple times.
Switch bill of lading is a type of open bill of lading.

iii. An electronic bill of lading (or e B/L) is the legal and functional equivalent of a paper bill of
lading. The electronic bill of lading must digitize the core functions of a paper bill of lading,
namely its legal acceptance as a receipt, as evidence of or containing the contract of carriage and
as a document of title.

2.5 Advantages of Electronic Bill of Lading:

i.As there are no papers involved, it saves paper cost as well the cost involved in sending the paper
to a different destination by courier

ii.The electronic bill of lading can be transmitted instantaneously around the word in the presence
of an internet connection, enabling a quick trade and ease of multiple transfers of ownership during
the carriage of the cargo.

iii.If there are any modifications required in the bill, it can be made quickly and cost-effectively as
compared to the paper system of the bill of lading.

                                                             136
iv.If the electronic bill of lading system is drawn correctly, such as introducing audit trials, PIN,
electronic signature etc., it will be difficult to commit any type of fraud.

2.6 Summary
The contract between the carrier and the shipper is already created before issuing the bill of lading
when the cargo is loaded on the ship. This is done to safeguard the shipper in case the cargo is
damaged before loading it on board the vessel and to help the shipper in the claim process. For the
carrier and the consignee, the bill of lading will act as the actual contract of carriage.
There are different types of bill of lading use in the carriage of goods by sea from a non-negotiable
and non-transferable bill of lading and is assigned as an Original document to a named
collector/receiver of the goods. In such a case, the presentation of the identification of the
consignee is mandatory in order to release the consignment. Moreover, the person or company
needs to surrender at least one copy of the B/L.

2.7 References /Further Reading/Web Resources
Bohra, Harsh. International Trade and Finance. Wide Vision.
The Evolution of the Bill of Lading SF du Toit University of Johannesburg". pp. 2­3.
Qais Ali Mahafzah, The Legal Effectiveness of the Both-to-Blame Collision Clause under Bills of
Lading and Charterparties, 41 Journal of Maritime Law & Commerce 263
Mayer, Ray August; with revisions by Don; Bixby, Michael 2013. International business law :
Text, Cases, and Readings 6th ed., international ed.. Harlow etc.
Buckley, Adrian (2004). Multinational Finance. Harlow, UK: Pearson Education Limited.
The Carriage of Goods by Sea Act 1992 s.1(2) provides that a bill of lading may be a "received
for shipment bill of lading

                                                             137
Unit3: The Regime of the contract of carriage of goods by sea

3.1 Introduction

In most contracts of carriage the carrier has greater bargaining power than the shipper, and in the
19th century English judges developed rules to protect the weaker parties. Beginning with the
Hague Rules, the various conventions set out to codify and develop such common law principles
by providing an international set of basic standards to be met by the carrier, with a view to
establishing a universal framework of legal rights and duties. In practice, however, the level of
protection was actually reduced because of new provisions allowing the carrier to (i) limit his
liability, and (ii) rely on a wide array of exemptions from liability. Also, whereas up until about
1885, the carrier's duties were deemed to be strict, by 1905 the duty became one of reasonable care
or due diligence only.

The Hague Rules of 1924 effectively codified, albeit in a diluted form, the English common law
rules to protect the cargo owner against exploitation by the carrier. Nearly 50 years later, the
Hague-Visby "update" made few changes, so that the newer Rules still applied only to "tackle to
tackle" carriage i.e. carriage by sea) and the container revolution of the 1950s was virtually
ignored. The Hague-Visby Rules both excluded cabotage carriage, and declared that deck cargo
and live animals were not to be considered as goods although the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act
1971 provided that cabotage, deck cargo and live animals are to be covered in English contracts.

The enormous list of exemptions to liability in Article IV made the Rules seem biased in favour
of the carrier. As a result, The United Nations produced its own Hamburg Rules which were both
more modern and fairer to cargo-owners; but while these have been enthusiastically adopted by
developing nations, the wealthier ship-owning nations have stuck to Hague-Visby. In 2008 the
final text of the Rotterdam Rules was agreed at UNCITRAL. These Rules are very extensive, with
over 90 Articles against 11 in Hague-Visby. Although the Rotterdam Rules are up-to-date and

                                                             138
address multimodal carriage, they have, nine years later, yet to be in force. It now seems doubtful
that the Rotterdam Rules will ever be adopted, but there is a slim possibility that a cut-down version
of the Rules ("Rotterdam Lite") might find favour. China has effectively adopted the Hague Rules.
The USA, which tends to shun conventions and instead rely on homespun legislation, has its own
statutes. These comprise the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act a mildly updated version of the Hague
Rules for goods in foreign commerce), and the Harter Act (for mostly domestic carriage.

3.2 Learning Outcomes

At the end of this unit you will be able to:

i.Under the Legal regime in the carriage of goods by sea

ii.You will learn about the main International Conventions governing the contract of carriage of
goods by sea

iii.You will how these conventions regulate international seagoing vessels.

iv.You will also have a deep knowledge of the rights and obligations of the parties in the contract
of carriage by sea.

3.3 Bills of Lading Act 1855

WHEREAS by the Custom of Merchants a Bill of Lading of Goods being transferable by
Endorsement the Property in the Goods may thereby .pass,- to the Endorsee, but nevertheless all
Rights in respect of the Contract contained in the Bill of Lading continue in the original Shipper
or Owner, and it is expedient that such Rights should pass with the Property: And whereas it
frequently happens that the Goods in respect of which Bills of Lading purport to be signed have
not been laden on board, and it is proper that such Bills of Lading in the Hands of a bond fide
Holder for Value should not. be questioned by the Master or other Person signing the same on the
Ground of the Goods not haying been laden as aforesaid: Be it therefore enacted by the Queen's
most Excellent Majesty, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons, in this present Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, as follows:

Rights under Bills of Lading to vest in Consignee or Endorsee.

                                                             139
Every Consignee of Goods named in a Bill of Lading, and every Endorsee of a. Bill of Lading to
whom the Property in the Goods therein mentioned shall pass, upon or by reason of such
Consignment or Endorsement, shall have transferred to and vested in him all Rights of Suit, and
be subject to the same Liabilities in respect of such Goods as if the Contract contained in the Bill
of Lading had been made with himself.

Not to affect Eight of Stoppage in transitu or Claims for Freight.

Nothing herein contained shall prejudice or affect any Right, of-Stoppage in transitu, or any Right
to claim Freight against the original Shipper or Owner, or any Liability of the Consignee or
Endorsee by reason or in consequence of Ms being such Consignee or Endorsee, or of his Receipt
of the Goods by reason or in consequence of such Consignment or Endorsement, Bill of Lading in
Hands of Consignee, &c, conclusive Evidence of the Shipment as against Master,

Every Bill of Lading in the Hands of a Consignee or Endorsee, for valuable Consideration
representing Goods to have been shipped on board a Vessel shall be conclusive Evidence of such
Shipment, as against the Master or other Person signing the same, notwithstanding that such Goods
or some Part thereof may not have been so shipped, unless such Holder of the Bill of Lading shall
.have had actual .Notice at the Time of receiving the same that the Goods had not been in fact
laden on board : Provided, that the Master or other Person so signing may exonerate himself in
respect of such Misrepresentation by showing that it was caused without any Default on his Part,
and wholly by the Fraud of the Shipper, or of the Holder, or some Person under whom the Holder
claims.

3.4 The Hague Rules 1924

The Hague Rules of 1924 formally the "International Convention for the Unification of Certain
Rules of Law relating to Bills of Lading, and Protocol of Signature' is an international convention
to impose minimum standards upon commercial carriers of goods by sea. The extent of application
of the Rules to contracts of carriage It is important to start by understanding that the Rules are not
applicable to every contract of carriage and therefore, apply only to those covered by a bill of
lading or any similar document of title issued in relation to goods carried by sea. Thus, the Rules
exclude their application from contracts not covered by a bill of lading as well as contracts covered

                                                             140
by any document which does not constitute a document of title. Therefore, if the contract is covered
by a waybill, the Rules will not apply since a waybill, lacks the character of a negotiable document
of title. The Rules will however, apply where the contract is covered by a straight bill of lading,
which lacks the character of negotiable document of title like a waybill but employs the form of a
standard bill of lading to which extent, it may become a negotiable document. Thus, in JI
MacWilliam Co. Inc v Mediterranean Shipping Co. SA (The Rafaela S), the claimant who was a
named consignee under a straight bill of lading, which indicated that the bill was non-negotiable,
sought the application of the Rules to a contract of carriage in respect of which goods carried from
Durban, South Africa got damaged between Felixstowe, England and Boston, USA. The Court
held that the Rules were applicable, and in so holding, stated that the document was a document
of title because it expressly provided that it had to be presented to obtain delivery of the goods.

3.5 Hague Visby protocol 1968

After being amended by the Brussels Amendments (officially the "Protocol to Amend the
International Convention for the Unification of Certain Rules of Law Relating to Bills of Lading
in 1968, the Rules became known colloquially as the Hague­Visby Rules. A final amendment was
made in the SDR Protocol in 1979. The Hague­Visby Rules is a set of international rules for the
international carriage of goods by sea. They are a slightly updated version of the original Hague
Rules which were drafted in Brussels in 1924.

The premise of the Hague­Visby Rules and of the earlier English common law from which the
Rules are drawn was that a carrier typically has far greater bargaining power than the shipper, and
that to protect the interests of the shipper/cargo-owner, the law should impose some minimum
affreightment obligations upon the carrier. However, the Hague and Hague­Visby Rules were
hardly a charter of new protections for cargo-owners; the English common law prior to 1924
provided more protection for cargo-owners, and imposed more liabilities upon common carriers.

The official title of the Hague Rules the "International Convention for the Unification of Certain
Rules of Law relating to Bills of Lading". After being amended by the Brussels Amendments
(officially the "Protocol to Amend the International Convention for the Unification of Certain
Rules of Law Relating to Bills of Lading") in 1968, the Rules became known colloquially as the

                                                             141
Hague­Visby Rules. A final amendment was made in the SDR Protocol in 1979. Many countries
declined to adopt the Hague-Visby Rules and stayed with the 1924 Hague Rules. Some other
countries which upgraded to Hague-Visby subsequently failed to adopt the 1979 SDR protocol.

Under the Rules, the carrier's main duties are to "properly and carefully load, handle, stow, carry,
keep, care for, and discharge the goods carried" and to "exercise due diligence to ... make the ship
seaworthy and to . properly man, equip and supply the ship". It is implicit (from the common law)
that the carrier must not deviate from the agreed route nor from the usual route; but Article IV(4)
provides that "any deviation in saving or attempting to save life or property at sea or any reasonable
deviation shall not be deemed to be an infringement or breach of these Rules.

The carrier's duties are not "strict", but require only a reasonable standard of professionalism and
care; and Article IV allows the carrier a wide range of situations exempting them from liability on
a cargo claim. These exemptions include destruction or damage to the cargo caused by: fire, perils
of the sea, Act of God, and act of war. A controversial provision exempts the carrier from liability
for neglect or default of the master ... in the navigation or in the management of the ship". This
provision is considered unfair to the shipper; and both the later Hamburg Rules (which require
contracting states to denounce the Hague­Visby Rules and Rotterdam Rules (which are not yet in
force) refuse exemption for negligent navigation and management.

3.5.1 The United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea, Known as the
Hamburg Rules 1978

The Hamburg Rules are a set of rules governing the international shipment of goods, resulting
from the United Nations International Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea adopted in
Hamburg on 31 March 1978. The Convention was an attempt to form a uniform legal base for the
transportation of goods on oceangoing ships. A driving force behind the convention was the
attempt of developing countries' to level the playing field. It came into force on 1 November 1992.

The first of the international conventions on the carriage of goods by sea was the Hague Rules of
1924. In 1968, the Hague Rules were updated to become the Hague-Visby Rules, but the changes
were modest. The convention still covered only "tackle to tackle" carriage contracts, with no
provision for multimodal transport. The industry-changing phenomenon of containerization was

                                                             142
barely acknowledged. The 1978 Hamburg Rules were introduced to provide a framework that was
both more modern, and less biased in favour of ship-operators. Although the Hamburg Rules were
readily adopted by developing countries, they were shunned by richer countries who stuck with
Hague and Hague-Visby. It had been expected that a Hague/Hamburg compromise might arise,
but instead the more extensive Rotterdam Rules appeared. Article 31 of the Hamburg Convention
covers its entry into force, coupled to denunciation of other Rules. Within five years after entry
into force of the Hamburg Rules, ratifying states must denounce earlier conventions, specifically
the Hague and Hague-Visby Rules. A long-standing aim has been to have a uniform set of rules
to govern carriage of goods, but there are now five different sets: Hague, Hague-Visby, Hague-
Visby/SDR, Hamburg and Rotterdam. (The Rotterdam Rules are not yet in force.]

3.5.2 Carrier's Liability

The greatest criticism of the Hague and Hague/Visby rules was that the carriers superior bargaining
position, which remained unaffected by the rules, was still capable of being used to insert,
indiscriminately, wide exclusion of liability clauses against which the shipper would remain
without a remedy. This was especially true against shippers from developing countries who have
reported over the years, innumerable loopholes and lacunas in the rules that allow carriers to limit
their liability. Also, a lack of expertise and weakness of bargaining position can make these
shippers particularly lose out to the fact that there is no model bill of lading that can be used by
the various parties.

Therefore, following the first UN regional Economic Commission, the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development began re-examining the legal regime that was established and
propagated by the Hague Rules. It can be seen therefore, that some fifty years after the ex-colonies
and dominions succeeded in getting The Hague Rules negotiated despite fierce resistance from
carriers and ship-owners, shippers, this time from the developing nations, were again forcing a
renegotiation of the rules. What's more, it was the very same concerns that were behind the
complaints. The excessive exemptive privileges of ship owners, exclusion from liability in key
carrier operations such as navigation and restrictive jurisdiction clauses in bills of lading were the
complaints levelled at carriers' and ship-owners' practices.

                                                             143
The frustration at such abuses as the insertion of clauses in bills of lading that are simply invalid
according to the Hague/Visby rules yet succeed in halting legal action due to the uncertainty of the
shipper of his rights was growing in many shipping circles. The jurisdiction clause was also being
abused to the benefit of carriers, the wide exceptions to the rules and low limits of monetary
liability were other factors that fed into this feeling of discontent. Such emotions however, were
matched by an equally powerful laissez-faire in favour of the status quo by governments in the
west that is still seen today in the small support the Hamburg Convention has received from major
shipping nations.

i.Period of Responsibility

Situation in Hague/Visby system

The Hague/Visby rules rightfully placed great importance on the question of liability and it was
decided as a fundamental rule, that the liability of the carrier would begin with loading of the ship,
and end with discharge from the ship. After discharge, the local law at that place would govern
liability. Article I(e) therefore provides, Carriage of goods covers the period from the time when
the goods are loaded on to the time when they are discharged from the ship.

Complete freedom of contract is maintained for the regulation of liability before loading and after
discharge. This is logical as the risks at sea are far greater than on land and it is this aspect of
carriage that the rules are attempting to regulate. Also, the rules and procedures for loading and
discharging are different in different countries for various reasons and it would be unwise to ignore
these. It can be argued that the carrier has very little control over the goods while they are not
aboard his ship and therefore it is fairer to allow the parties to provide for this themselves.

Unsurprisingly in rules of this age, they have been subject to litigation. In Pyrene v. Scindia
Navigation Co. there was a dispute as to the purpose of the words with the court ruling that they
were intended only to `identify the first operation in the series which constituted the carriage of
goods by sea'. In Goodwin, Ferreira v Lamport and Holt it was held that discharge occurred when
all the goods had been discharged so that goods discharged in fact, were not discharged in law
until the entire cargo joined them on solid ground.

                                                             144
ii.Article IV of the Hamburg Rules

Article IV of the Hamburg abandons this `tackle to tackle' rule and states

"(1) The responsibility of the carrier for the goods under this Convention covers the period during
which the carrier is in charge of the goods at the port of loading, during the carriage and at the port
of discharge.

(2) For the purpose of paragraph 1 of this article, the carrier is deemed to be in charge of the goods
from the time he has taken over the goods..."

.It is clear from this article that the carrier's liability has been extended to all time under which he
has taken over the goods from the sender until such times as they are regarded by the destination
port as out of port and in storage, warehouse or onward transit etc. "

Read in conjunction with Article 23 which states that, "Any stipulation... is null and void to the
extent that it derogates, directly or indirectly, from the provisions of this Convention." It is clear
that the carrier's ability to contract out of this clause has been removed completely.

iii.Basis of Liability

There are three main ways of breaching a contract for the carriage of goods by sea, these are by
losing or damaging the goods, delivering the goods short of their destination, or there has been a
delay in carriage. Under Article 4(5) of the Hague/Visby rules, the carrier is liable for `any loss or
damage' to the goods. It is unclear if this includes loss caused by a reduction in the value of the
goods due to delay. The House of Lords, in The Heron II, Koufas v. C. Csarnikow Ltd. stated that
damages would be assessed at the difference between the market value at the time of contracted
delivery and the time of actual delivery. Article 3(1)(a) provides that the carrier must exercise due
diligence in ensuring that the ship is seaworthy and according to Article 3(2) must also exercise
due care of the cargo. However, it is Article 4(2) and its list of seventeen exceptions that has been
at the route of calls for an amended set of rules. In fact it is probably because of Article 4(2) that
we have a Hamburg Convention at all. Under these seventeen circumstances, the carrier can
contract out of his liability which you can be assured is overwhelmingly the norm. In the case of

                                                             145
The Marine Sulphur Queen they were termed the `uncontrollable causes' and as such, the carrier
will not be liable for them.

Article 4(2)(a) is commonly termed the negligence clause and excludes liability from the carrier
for `act, neglect, or default of the master, mariner, pilot or servants of the carrier in the navigation
or in the management of the ship'. While the practical use, to the shipping industry as a whole, of
this clearly unfair clause is open to question, marine insurers maintain that it is vital. The fear of
course is that it is not necessary to the majority of conscientious carriers and is therefore merely
relied on by a minority of negligent carriers to the expense both of the shipper in the particular
case, and to their more careful competitors.

    iv. Article 5 of the Hamburg Convention makes serious modifications to this
             provision stating

Under Article 5(1), The carrier is liable for the loss resulting from loss of or damage to the goods,
as well as from delay in delivery, if the occurrence which caused the loss, damage or delay took
place while the goods were in his charge as defined in Article 4, unless the carrier proves that he,
his servants and agents took all measures that could reasonably be required to avoid the occurrence
and its consequences.

This puts the liability for all loss, damage or delay clearly on the carrier unless he can show that
he took all reasonable actions to avoid the loss. At first sight this seems a far more logical
distribution of risk than what occurs under the Hague/Visby rules. Whatever the danger and
unpredictability of life at sea, the carrier is in far more control over such situations than the shipper
is. While the shipper can pass on the costs of insurance to shippers, the possibility now exists for
careful carriers to reduce insurance costs by making less claims than their competitors. Likewise,
negligent carriers will soon be unable to secure insurance and will rightfully be excluded from
operating. Surely this is a more rational and economically efficient way of operating the market.

Article 5(2) as occurring when,

`the goods have not been delivered at the port of discharge provided for in the contract of carriage
by sea within the time expressly agreed upon or, in the absence of such agreement, within the time

                                                             146
which it would be reasonable to require of a diligent carrier, having regard to the circumstances of
the case.'

3.5.3 The Rotterdam Rules 2008

The legal issues that surround the Rotterdam Rules and their implications. This will be achieved
by analyzing the provisions of the rules and various other publications in concern with the subject
of carriage of goods by sea. Of special help to this paper are various publications by The United
Nations Commission on International Law- UNCITRAL. This paper will start by analyzing
various objectives of the Rules then proceed to look at the provisions put in place to achieve these
aims. This paper puts into focus that there are might be varied types interpretations of the laws and
hence put special emphasis on the need to reduce ambiguity and maintaining uniformity in
application of the law.

The Rotterdam Rules though have not come into effect. If it successfully comes into application,
ship owners and maritime carriers will have significantly increased liability in respect to carriage
of cargo under the convention. In addition to regulating international maritime carriage of goods,
it will also legislate for international multimodal carriage of goods. Due to this fact, UNCITRAL
describes the convention as a "maritime plus" instrument which for instance eliminates the
`nautical fault exception where there exception of error in the navigation or management of a
vessel. One notable fact is that under the Rotterdam Rules, the obligation to exercise due diligence
in relation to the seaworthiness of a vessel is not restricted to before and as the commencement of
a voyage and has been extended to the entire duration of the voyage. It takes a stricter stance than
Hague Rules and most of the preceding legislations. It also significantly increases the limits of
liability per package or unit of weight beyond all the previous laws and provisions. It is therefore
apparent that wide adoption of these Laws will lead to increased financial impact to seafarers due
to increased liability. Analysts are of the opinion that ship owners, their investment partners and
insurers will be subjected to increased costs of cargo claims.

Convention has many positive features. It retains many of the beneficial aspects of existing
legislations. For instance, it retains the existing aspect of network liability. Network liability
implies that "liability and the applicable limits of liability for loss of and damage to the goods
occurring before or after the sea-leg will be determined by any uni-modal international instrument

                                                             147
compulsorily applicable to the relevant mode of transport where the loss or damage occurs. The
importance of this provision is pegged on the fact that the liability for loss and damage applies
regardless of whether it occurred in the sea or in the land leg. The concept of `fault based liability
has also been maintained allowing greater freedom of contract in linear trade to parties.

Just like in the existing conventions, the Rotterdam Rules apply transport documents like the bills
of lading and the sea waybills, issued both in liner and in non-liner trades. It differs from Hague-
Visby Rules due to the fact that it does not apply to charter parties whether used in liner or non-
liner transportation. While asserting that it does not criticize the use of "through transport"
documents, it also does not include an express provision that permits their continuing use. This
implies that individual states' national legislation will continue governing through transport
carriage and documentation. Provisions on jurisdiction and arbitration are based on the approach
of the Hamburg Rules which are overly restrictive. They give freedom to cargo owners to choose
from a number of jurisdictions the court where they can sue the carrier. It however has the "opt-
in" provision which for instance, the European Union would most likely not go for.

ii.Aims of the Rotterdam Rules

The general objective of putting up this legislation was to create a harmonized and modern body
of rules that would effectively regulate the sea trading environment of the 21st century. This overall
objective can be broken down into the following sections:

Currently there are three legislations that regulate the carriage of goods by sea; the Hague Rule,
the Hague-Visby Rule and the Hamburg Rule. Their application is not uniform across different
states; while some states have not even ratified them yet, where they are in application they are
often interpreted differently from country to country. This difference in application and practice
creates legal uncertainty which has far reaching effect on international trade through the transport
of goods by sea. The Rotterdam Rules therefore seek to amalgamate these rules and achieve
uniformity in their application.

The existing legislations fail to give legitimacy and the functional equivalence of paper-based
documentation to electronic transport documents. They also fail to recognize the prevalence of
containerization for the international movement of goods. The Rotterdam Rules are aimed at

                                                             148
addressing these issue and others through various provisions as will be discussed in the sections
that follow.

    vii. Key provisions of the Rotterdam Rules

Rotterdam Rules are significantly extensive than any of these Conventions that precede them with
96 Articles. This paper considers the following key provision which are the most notable

a.Scope of application

The Rotterdam Rules apply between the carrier and the consignee, controlling party or holder to
international contracts of carriage which include an international sea leg. It therefore holds if in
respect to the carriage contract, the place of receipt, the port of loading, the place of delivery, or
the port of discharge is locate in the contracting state. There is exception on applicability for charter
parties and other contracts for the use of a vessel. UNCITRAL assert that the application of the
Convention does not take into regard the nationality of the vessel, the carrier, the performing
parties, the shipper, the consignee or nay other interested parties.

b.Period of application, maritime plus

The Convention introduces the concept of the `door-to-door' approach which implies that it applies
to the entire period that there is carriage of goods from the instance of delivery to the end of
discharge in the receiving port. This effectively ensures that the career cannot easily take advantage
of network liability where there exist different bases of liability determined by the stage at which
damage occurs. Simply put, it creates a single regime liability where the carrier is bound to exercise
due diligence in the whole course of the carriage last they be held liable for damages. Rhidian
describes the convention as `maritime plus' since it requires a sea leg for it to apply. This in
contrast to a perfectly multimodal system

c.Performing parties

This is another concept that has been introduced by the Rotterdam Rules. It defines a maritime
performing party as any person other than the carrier that performs any of the carrier's obligations
directly or indirectly at the carrier's request or under the carrier's supervision or control. This

                                                             149
implies that side parties at the port such as terminal operators, stevedores are subject to the
liabilities and obligations applicable to the carrier under this convention since it covers events
between the period of arrival of the goods at the port and their departure from the port. They are
also entitled to the same defenses and limits of liability under certain circumstances. It also
classifies inland carriers as `maritime performing parties' who are not subject to the provisions of
the Convention.

d.Volume contracts

There is a provision that gives freedom to derogate from the Rotterdam Rules in respect of `volume
contracts' for a series of shipments of specified quantities of goods during an agreed period of
time. Despite this provision, regulations on seaworthiness, crewing and ship equipping cannot be
omitted in any case. Also, under Articles 29 and 32, it stipulates that there can be no omissions or
amendments on the provision of information dangerous goods the limits of liability and the loss of
the right to limit liability

e. Obligations of the shipper

The obligations and liability of the shipper are contained in Article 27 and 29. They are follows;
the shipper shall deliver the goods in such condition that they will withstand the intended carriage,
including their loading, handling, stowing, lashing and securing, and unloading, and that they will
not cause harm to persons or property. The shipper shall provide to the carrier... such information,
instructions and documents relating to the goods that are not otherwise reasonably available to the
carrier". This will allow the carrier to: comply with applicable laws and regulations; compile the
contract document; and arrange for the proper handling and carriage of the goods. These
regulations are much stricter than the pervious regime of laws which raises concerns that they will
lead to increased costs due to increased liability. It should however be noted that they are a positive
step forward since they require that all participants exercise their duties carefully hence effectively
reducing many conflicts and offering clarity in arbitration where conflicts have already occurred.

                                                             150
3.6 Summary
In spite of many years and more modern rules for carriage of goods in place, hague visby rules
still dominates the shipping industry. This makes the knowledge of Hague visby rules so important
for anyone connected with the carriage of goods. Knowledge of these rules can a give new view
point to the seafarers about what are the responsibilities of the carrier for whom they work. It is an
inevitable fact that the Rotterdam Rules will increase ship owners' liabilities to a great extent.
Despite this, the new law will accomplish the important task of providing the much needed
uniformity and precision for legislation on international carriage of goods by sea. It effectively
counters the problem of legal uncertainties that has been a major challenge for the previous regime
of laws. These rules also incorporate modern business practices including containerization, door-
to-door multimodal contracts, electronic aspects and e-commerce. They will go a long way in
improving the sea trade and transport business which is a vital component of the world economy.

In a world comprising cargo owning nations, and ship owning nations, and where most nations are
both, there is a continual balancing of risk allocation concerning the damage or loss of sea-borne
cargo. Therefore, on the fields of international maritime law, the international law community such
as United nation has sought uniformity and harmonization on cargo liability that would equitably
address the often-conflicting interests of shippers and carriers. Historically, there have been several
well known attempts at establishing uniform international law in this field, including: the Hague
Rules 1924; the Hague/Visby Rules 1968; the Hamburg Rules 1978; and so forth. However, it is
not likely to be resolved with all parties satisfied. During the 1970's pressure mounted from
developing countries and major shipper nations for a full re-examination of cargo liability regimes
in Hague-visby Rules. The Hamburg Rules establishes a relative uniform legal regime governing
the rights and obligations of shippers, carriers and consignees under a contract of carriage of goods
by sea. It was prepared at the request of developing countries, and its adoption by States has been
endorsed by such intergovernmental organizations as the United Nations Conference on Trade and

 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Briefly discuss the legal regime of the contract of
 carriage of goods by sea

                                                             151
3.7 References/Further Reading/Web Resources
Indira Carr, and Peter Stone, International Trade Law 6th ed, Routledge, 2018
Jason Chuah, Law of International Trade: Cross-Border Commercial Transactions, 5th ed, Sweet
& Maxwell, 2013) at pages 243-245. See also art 1 (a) of the Hague-Visby Rules on who is a
carrier for the purpose of a contract of carriage to which the Rules are applicable.
John F. Wilson, Carriage of Goods by Sea, 7th ed, Pearson Education Ltd., 2010
3.8 Possible answer to self-assessment exercise:
The contract of carriage by sea is an aspect of the shipping law which has attracted strategic
significance because the bulk of international trade is transacted through this medium. Carriage of
goods may be by land railway transport and road transport, by air, or by sea.
United Nations Convention on the Carriage of Goods by Sea Hamburg, 1978 the Hamburg Rules
Adopted by a diplomatic conference on 31 March 1978, the Convention establishes a uniform legal
regime governing the rights and obligations of shippers, carriers and consignees under a contract
of carriage of goods by sea.
Nigeria is a party to the Hague Rules Unification of Certain Rules Relating to Bills of Lading
1924, which have been incorporated into domestic legislation as the Carriage of Goods by Sea Act
2004 now LFN 2010. It essentially covers only outgoing cargo, not imports.

                                                             152
Unit 4: International Trade Law

4.1 Introduction

International trade law is the set of laws and agreements that govern commerce between countries.
International trade laws create the rules that countries and businesses must follow in order to do
business across borders. Lawyers who work in the field help create international agreements. The
international shipping industry is responsible for the carriage of around 90% of world trade.
Shipping is the life blood of the global economy. Without shipping, intercontinental trade, the bulk
transport of raw materials, and the import/export of affordable food and manufactured goods
would simply not be possible.

The concept of logistics has been used in business for more than two decades. Logistics
management as an earlier and limited version of supply chain management until the beginning of
the 2000s, covers the physical process of planning, organising and controlling the flow of materials
and services from the supplier's point to the customer's as the end point. Besides these aspects,
the concept of supply chain management also includes customer satisfaction, customer relations,
financial flow, and information flow by making logistics functions a more integrated and complex
group of activities. Therefore, logistics support and interaction of logistics and supply chain
management with local and global trades cannot be disregarded. As approximately 85 per cent of
international trade has been made by maritime transport by using either ocean transport, seaways
and inland waterways, the role of maritime transport is considered to be crucial in international
trades. This unit is mostly focuses on developments in international maritime transport by also
emphasising the developments in global trade. It gives a broad idea of logistics and its interaction
with international trade. This unit provides general characteristics of logistics and interrelation of
various business areas.. The unit is more depth the developments in global economy and the
maritime transport industry in relation to international trade. Objectives of this is to provide a
general description of logistics, and countries with economies in transition in the global economy
and - to review international maritime trade networks, review of developments in international
maritime transport by cargo types, in particular, and review of liner shipping connectivity data for

                                                             153
the purpose of determining, in more depth, a background to international competitiveness in
maritime trade routes and cargo types between countries on maritime networks.

4.2 Learning Outcomes

It is expected that at the end of this unit you will be able to:

i.Learn about international trade Law and its relevant in international maritime trade.

ii. You will have deep knowledge of the principles of international trade Law

iii.You will know its applicability in modern international maritime trade.

4.3 International Trade Law

International trade law governs the way in which states may restrict or regulate trade in goods and
services, including in relation to tobacco products. It is, for the most part, governed by the World
Trade Organization agreements, with some states also party to bilateral, plurilateral, or regional
preferential trade agreements. International trade law includes the appropriate rules and customs
for handling trade between countries. However, it is also used in legal writings as trade between
private sectors, which is not right. This branch of law is now an independent field of study as most
governments have become part of the world trade, as members of the World Trade Organization
Since the transaction between private sectors of different countries is an important part of the WTO
activities, this latter branch of law is now a very important part of the academic works and is under
study in many universities across the world. International trade law should be distinguished from
the broader field of international economic law. The latter could be said to encompass not only
WTO law, but also law governing the international monetary system and currency regulation, as
well as the law of international development.

The body of rules for transnational trade in the 21st century derives from medieval commercial
laws called the lex mercatoria and lex maritima respectively, the law for merchants on land and
the law for merchants on the sea. Modern trade law extending beyond bilateral treaties began
shortly after the Second World War, with the negotiation of a multilateral treaty to deal with trade
in goods: the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. International trade law is based on theories

                                                             154
of economic liberalism developed in Europe and later the United States from the 18th century
onwards.

International Trade Law is an aggregate of legal rules of international legislation and new lex
mercatoria, regulating relations in international trade. International legislation international
treaties and acts of international intergovernmental organizations regulating relations in
international trade. lex mercatoria the law for merchants on land. Alok Narayan defines lex
mercatoria as any law relating to businesses which was criticised by Professor Julius Stone. and
lex maritime - the law for merchants on sea. Alok in his recent article criticised this definition to
be too narrow and merely-creative. Professor Dodd and Professor Malcolm Shaw of Leeds
University supported this proposition.

The Lex Mercatoria is the grouping of legal rules that guide and underlie international trade, which
acts totally independently of the positive law of states, being considered normative. Currently, the
new Lex Mercatoria has been prepared. The former Lex Mercatoria was generated in light of the
characteristic demands of the time in question, including the values, culture, and future provisions
of the time, whereas, the new one is recognized as having the responsibility of common
international trade law. The General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade has been the backbone of
international trade law since 1948 after the charter for international trade had been agreed upon in
Havana. It contains rules relating to "unfair" trading practices dumping and subsidies. Many things
impacted GATT like the Uruguay Round and the North American Free Trade Agreement.

In 1994 the World Trade Organization was established to take the place of the GATT. This is
because the GATT was meant to be a temporary fix to trade issues, and the founders hoped for
something more concrete. It took many years for this to come about, however, because of the lack
of money. The British Economy was in crisis and there was not much backing from Congress to
pass the new agreement. The idea of these agreements WTO and GATT was to create an equal
field for all countries in trade. This way all countries got something of equal value out of the trade.
This was a difficult thing to do since every country has a different economy size. This led to the
Trade Expansion act of 1962...

                                                             155
4.4 Principles of International Trade Laws

National Treatment Principle: Imported and locally-produced goods should be treated equally at
least after the foreign goods have entered the market. The same should apply to foreign and
domestic services, and to foreign and local trademarks, copyrights and patents. These principles
apply to trade in goods, trade in services as well as trade related aspects of intellectual property
rights.

Most Favored Nation (MFN) Principle or standard: The MFN principles ensures that every time a
WTO Member lowers a trade barrier or opens up a market, it has to do so for the like goods or
services from all WTO Members, without regard of the Members' economic size or level of
development. The MFN principle requires to accord to all WTO Members any advantage given to
any other country. A WTO Member could give an advantage to other WTO Members, without
having to accord advantage to non- Members but only WTO Members benefit from the most
favorable treatment.

Cross-border operations are subject to taxation by more than one country. Commercial activity
that occurs among several jurisdictions or countries is called a cross-border transaction. Those
involved in any international business development or international trade should be knowledgeable
in tax law, as every country enforces different laws on foreign businesses. International tax
planning ensures that cross-border businesses stay tax compliant and avoid or lessen double
taxation.

4.5 World Trade Organization

In 1995, the World Trade Organization, a formal international organization to regulate trade, was
established. It is the most important development in the history of international trade law. The
purposes and structure of the organization is governed by the Agreement Establishing The World
Trade Organization, also known as the Marrakesh Agreement. It does not specify the actual rules
that govern international trade in specific areas. These are found in separate treaties, annexed to
the Marrakesh Agreement. The World Trade Organization is the `only global international
organization dealing with the rules of trade between nations'. It is a `rules-based, member-driven'
multilateral organization, founded in 1994 . The objectives of the WTO recognise that its Member

                                                             156
States' `relations in the field of trade and economic endeavour should be conducted with a view to
raising standards of living, ensuring full employment and a large and steadily growing volume of
real income and effective demand, and expanding the production of and trade in goods and
services, while allowing for the optimal use of the world's resources in accordance with the
objective of sustainable development, seeking both to protect and preserve the environment and to
enhance the means for doing so in a manner consistent with their respective needs and concerns at
different levels of economic development.

The WTO provides a common institutional framework for the conduct of trade relations among its
Members in matters related to the' WTO agreements, a series of international treaties that regulate
various aspects of international trade. Joining the WTO involves making a single undertaking to
accede to all of the WTO agreements as a `whole and indivisible package. In making the single
undertaking, WTO Members accede to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade
Organization, as well as more than two dozen covered agreements regulating different aspects of
trade between members. Under these agreements, Members commit to restrictions on their
imposition of tariff barriers such as import taxes or customs duties and non-tariff barriers to trade
(such as regulatory measures, quantitative restrictions, and internal tax laws that apply to both
domestic and imported products. WTO Members also make commitments in other areas related to
trade, such as protection of intellectual property rights, food safety, agriculture, customs valuation,
and subsidies.

4.5.1 Preferential trade agreements

In addition to belonging to the WTO, many states including WHO FCTC Parties are parties to
other trade agreements. These agreements known as preferential trade agreements or PTAs are
usually bilateral or regional agreements. Parties to PTAs grant trade preferences to each other,
typically by eliminating tariffs. PTAs may also include non-tariff obligations similar to those in
the WTO agreements or obligations that place greater restrictions on their parties than WTO rules,
such as requiring higher levels of intellectual property protection than the provisions in the TRIPS
Agreement. Although many PTAs provide for inter-state dispute settlement, generally, states have
used WTO dispute settlement procedures when they wish to bring dispute settlement proceedings
against other WTO Members.

                                                             157
Regulatory and tax measures to implement the WHO FCTC may interact with obligations under
international trade law, in particular the GATT, the TBT, and the TRIPS agreement.

In these agreements, WTO member states commit to ensuring that:

Regulatory and tax measures do not discriminate between local and imported `like products', or
between `like products' from different countries.

Regulatory measures that constitute technical regulations are no more trade-restrictive than
necessary'.

Certain intellectual property protections are implemented into national law

These obligations have been the subject of WTO disputes relating to tobacco products, as well as
discussions in WTO committees.

The scope of WTO :

(a) provide a framework for administration and implementation of agreements; (b) forum for
further negotiations; (c) trade policy review mechanism; and (d) promote greater coherence among
members economics policies

(a) A principle of non-discrimination (most-favored-nation treatment obligation and the national
treatment obligation) (b) market access (reduction of tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade) (c)
balancing trade liberalization and other societal interests (d) harmonization of national regulation
TRIPS agreement, TBT agreement, SPS agreement.

4.5.2 International Maritime Trade

Maritime trade officially began in the year 1648, when the Treaty of Westphalia confirmed the
ideas set out by Hugo Grotius, who said that the sea should be open for international trade. This
evolved further in the year 1982, when the first collaborative effort to establish a maritime security
organization, with ocean law framework in place, was established. Because over 90% of the entire
World's trade occurs by the sea, it is important for its entirety to be carefully preserved in order to

                                                             158
ensure that successful trade is not threatened. Numerous developments were made in these laws
that established power over things like general security and trading practices.

The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea is especially dedicated to combating pirates,
addressing safety issues and helping reduce the surge of piracy around the coast of Somalia and
surrounding countries. Since maritime piracy had doubled in the year 2008, over forty countries
have begun to patrol the Gulf of Aden to help protect sailors and goods. In addition to combating
pirate activities, the group was successful in establishing countermeasures to the trade of drugs
and narcotics overseas. Three separate conventions, which had occurred between 1961 and 1988,
had resulted in much stricter protective policies to be enacted on maritime trade, especially around
problem areas. The control measures that were provided by these treaties immediately resulted in
the decrease of narcotics and legal drugs being traded on the black market, but the organization's
goals are far from over.

4.5.3 Dispute settlement

Resolving trade disputes is one of the core activities of the WTO. A dispute arises when a member
government believes another member government is violating an agreement or a commitment that
it has made in the WTO. The WTO has one of the most active international dispute settlement
mechanisms in the world. Since 1995, 612 disputes have been brought to the WTO and over 350
rulings have been issued.

Most prominent in the area of dispute settlement in international trade law is the WTO dispute
settlement system. The WTO dispute settlement body is operational since 1995 and has been very
active since then with 369 cases between 1 January 1995 and 1 December 2007. Nearly a quarter
of disputes reached an amicable solution, in other cases the parties to the dispute resorted to
adjudication. The WTO dispute settlement body has exclusive and compulsory jurisdiction over
disputes on WTO law (Article 23.1 Dispute Settlement Understanding.

The various stages through which a dispute can pass in the dispute settlement system. There are
two main ways to settle a dispute once a complaint has been filed in the WTO:

                                                             159
(i) the parties find a mutually agreed solution, particularly during the phase of bilateral
         consultations; and (ii) through adjudication, including the subsequent implementation of
         the panel and Appellate Body reports, which are binding upon the parties once adopted by
         the DSB.

(ii) There are three main stages to the WTO dispute settlement process: (i) consultations
         between the parties; (ii) adjudication by panels and, if applicable, by the Appellate Body;
         and (iii) the implementation of the ruling, which includes the possibility of
         countermeasures in the event of failure by the losing party to implement the ruling.

4.6 Summary

More than 153 governments have signed the agreement establishing the World Trade
Organization, committing themselves to comply with a large body of complex rules and
procedures that regulate the actions of national governments affecting international trade. A
continuing work program is under way in the WTO on important topics such as competition policy.
Every country expecting to gain the benefits of WTO membership will in turn be expected to
comply with its obligations under the WTO agreements and to implement them effectively through
changes in its domestic laws, institutions, and administrative practices. Each country will also want
to take steps, when necessary, to insure compliance by other countries. Beyond the WTO - The
last decade or so has seen an explosion in the number of regional trade agreements - mostly free
trade areas and customs unions ­ and this trend is likely to continue even if the Doha Round of
multinational trade negotiations is successfully concluded.

Two main areas of international trade on the domestic side include trade remedy work and export
controls/sanctions. Trade remedies are tools used by the government to take corrective action
against imports that are causing material injury to a domestic industry because of unfair foreign
pricing and/or foreign government subsidies. An example of a trade remedy includes antidumping
duties set forth by the International Trade Commission in response to dumping; this occurs when
a foreign company sells a product in the U.S. that is below the price it sells for in its `home market'
and thus causes harm to the U.S. industry. Export control laws govern the exportation of sensitive
equipment, software, and technology for reasons related to foreign policy objectives and national
security. Three U.S. government agencies have the authority to issue export licenses, including:

                                                             160
Department of State; Department of Commerce; and Department of Treasury. Violations of export
control laws can carry both civil and criminal penalties. On the international treaty front,
companies may need advice on the rules of the World Trade Organization, which is a formal
international organization that regulates trade. Other relevant treaties include the North American
Free Trade Agreement and bilateral investment treaties. Some firm practices focus on only one
aspect of the law such as antidumping, whereas others are very broad practice groups that touch
all areas of international trade. The predicted growth area for the future is the laws surrounding
data and privacy information flow, since what is permissible differs greatly by country.

 SELF ASSESSMENT EXERCISE: Describe the relationship between International Trade
 Organization with International Maritime and Trade.

4.7 References/Further Reading

Van den Bossche, Peter (2008). The Law and Policy of the World Trade Organization - Text,
Cases and Materials. Maastricht University: Cambridge University Press. pp. 917.

Dixon, Martin (2013). Textbook on International law (7th ed.). Oxford Press.. ISBN 978-0-19-
957445-2.

Dixon, Martin; McCorquodale, Robert; Williams, Sarah (2011). Cases and Materials on
International Law (5th ed.). Oxford Press. . ISBN 978-0-19-956271-8.

Yang, Junsok. The Effect of International Trade on Rule of Law". Journal of East Asian Economic
Integration. ProQuest 1399973050.

Matsushita, Mitsuo. Governance of International Trade Under World Trade Organization
Agreements-Relationships Between World Trade Organization Agreements and Other Trade
Agreements". Journal of World Trade. Pro Quest 217554638.

Fenwick, C (1935). "International Law and International Trade". The American Journal of
International Law. American Society of International Law.

Coughlin, Cletus. "Measuring International Trade Policy: A Primer on Trade Restrictiveness
Indices". Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis. ProQuest 792958786.

Bird, Frederick; Vance, Thomas; Woolstencroft, Peter. "Fairness in International Trade and
Investment: North American Perspectives. Journal of Business Ethics.

Rules of World Trade Organization International Trade American Express"
www.americanexpress.co.

                                                             161
4.8 Possible Answer to self-Assessment Exercise:
Since the end of World War II, ongoing trade liberalism under the banner `World Peace through
World Trade has led to the gradual removal of political, regulatory, and cultural obstacles to trade.
Integration processes took place both at the regional level and at the global level. The collapse of
the Soviet Union and the opening up of China in the 1990s represented landmark events that incited
the entry of close to 2 billion consumers as well as the related resources into the global economy
International trade relies on international maritime transport which provides the basis for which
goods and services cross international boundaries. International maritime transport also provides
an important legal function in international trade since it provides a link between the buyer and
seller of the goods or services being traded. International trade relies volume-wise for about 80%
on maritime transportation, which involves several markets such as dry bulk, roll-on/roll-off,
general cargo, and containers.

                                                             162
